The Witch-Herbalist of the Remote Town


AMOS TUTUOLA





Table of Contents





Title Page

		Acknowledgement

		The Rocky Town

		The God of the State

		When I Became a Hunter

		At Last I was Married to Lola

		My Wife was Barren

		My Preparation for My Journey

		I Left My Town for the Remote Town

		The Brutal Ape

		Abnormal Squatting Man of the Jungle

		The End of the Path

		The Wild Jungle Wealthy People

		The Strange Round Shadow

		Long-Breasted Mother of the Mountain

		The Crazy Removable-Headed Wild Man

		The Town of the “Born and Die Baby”

		The Offensive Wild People

		The Stalwart Gateman and his Devil

		The Fight on the Roadside Shrines

		The Roadside Town

		Road to the Remote Town

		The Remote Town

		In the Palace of the Witch-Herbalist

		In the Hall of Assembly of the Mother

		The Complete Skeleton Man

		The Bald Lady

		The Epileptic Man

		The Woman with One Ear

		The Man with Eight Burdens

		It is My Turn Now

		On My Way Back to My Town

		I Ate from the Soup on the Way

		I Returned to My Town At Last

		Wife and Husband Conceived

		Under the River

		People Thought that We were Deads

		My “Memory” Sued My First “Mind” and Second “Mind”

		About the Author

		By the Same Author

		Copyright





The publishers would like to thank Molara Ogundipe-Leslie of the University of Ibadan for her advice and help in preparing Amos Tutuola’s manuscript for publication.





The Rocky Town




In the Rocky Town, the inhabitants worshipped only the god of iron, god of thunder, god of oracle, and god and goddess of the rivers. All kinds of images and idols and the “god of the state” which belonged to the government of the Rocky Town, were also worshipped. The inhabitants lived amongst the wild animals such as tigers, lions, wolves, leopards, etc. This was so because jungles, forests, etc. were more than the inhabitants of the town.

But as my father was more intelligent than the other old people, he was installed as the chief priest of oracle and the chief of the pagans. There was a big and deep river on the outskirts of the town, the distance of which was about two kilometres from the town. Several shrines were built near the banks. All of the people of the town kept their gods, idols, images, etc. in the shrines. And there they worshipped them. But as these gods, idols, images, etc. were of different kinds, therefore, different kinds of sacrifices were offered to them.

The big and deep river was flowing heavily to the south with very strong tides and waves. The water which formed this river was gushing out continuously from a strange pitcher of antiquity which stood like a small hill at the spot from where the river started to flow. As various kinds of bold and terrible images were carved on the back of this strange pitcher of antiquity, it was so different kinds of fearful noises were coming out from the inside of it. All these horrible things made the people fear to go near both the river and the vast pitcher, although many beautiful mighty trees, palm trees, coconut trees, etc. were lined up along the banks which had very lovely white sand.

But there was none of the people who lived in this Rocky Town, neither grown-ups nor children, without his or her own god, idol, or image which he or she worshipped. So as uncountable shrines were built at the banks of the river, the people called the banks at some time THE TEMPLE OF GODS, IDOLS, IMAGES, ETC. If any one of the inhabitants had no god, idol, or image, which he or she worshipped, both children and grown-ups of the town would not like him or her, but they would take him or her as an unbeliever, and the rest of the people would not even go near him or her at all.





The God of the State




Furthermore, there was one of these gods which was called “the god of the state” and it belonged to the government of this Rocky Town. This special title was given to it because it was the most powerful and terrible of all the rest of the gods and idols, except the god of thunder. The height of this “god of the state” was just like that of a sternly looking giant. It was too terrible and fearful for the eyes of human beings to see, because it held above its head a very long and big spear by the right hand in such a fearful way as if it was preparing to stab to death without hesitation one who might go near it or stand at a short distance before it. This big and fearful spear which it held was so dazzling from its sharpness that it was hard to look at it for a half-twinkling or thirty seconds, without the eyes being hurt. (In the Yoruba language, “twinkling” means minute.)

The body of this “god of the state” was fearfully decorated with the skins of various kinds of animals such as lions, tigers, leopards, crocodiles, boar, forest lizards, etc. All of these skins were jointly woven into one huge garment of the Rocky Town’s type. The huge garment reached only to its elbows, neck and a half of its thighs. On the left of this god, there was a complete skeleton of a man which it held tightly with the left hand. The platform on which it stood upright was about twenty metres above the ground. It was round but was flat at the top. Hundreds of skulls of men, women, animals, big birds of all kinds, etc. were stuck round the platform and so many were gathered round the feet of the god.

The neck of this terrible god was very huge and several thick veins were sprung out round it. Its eyes were just like those of an owl but bigger and more fearful. Each was moving sternly to different directions at one-twinkling intervals. Its nose was the same shape like that of a human but bigger. Each of the nostrils was so large that it could easily contain a big bottle. Its head had the shape of that of a human as well, but it was bigger than that of a human. The hair on this head weighed more than one ton of a load. All was muddled together from the rotten blood of the animals, humans, etc. which was pouring on it often and often. Each of its jaws was flat and thick beyond what a person could see and laugh at.

The upper lip of this “god of the state” was spread on the lower one and it could not move up or down because of the large quantity of long hair which pressed it one one place, And the lower one was dropped towards its chest because of the very long and thick beard which overweighted it.

Furthermore, one of its jaws was painted with white and red paints, while the other was painted with white and yellow paints. So whenever the strong breeze started to blow, the garment of the various kinds of animal skins which were woven together would be making different kinds of fearful noises which the ears of the human beings could hear and be happy from. So for its fearful and ugly appearance both young men and women of the town feared it greatly. But they gave it much respect which they could not even give to the king.

As thousands of the gods, idols, etc. which belonged to the common people of the town were kept in the shrines at the bank of this river, as well as the “god of the state”, special ceremonies were performed for them in the tenth month of the year, for seventeen days and nights. The sacrifices which were given to each of the gods, idols, etc. were of different kinds. But the kinds of the sacrifices which were given to the “god of the state” were almost all kinds of the bush animals and domestic animals, including kola nuts, bitter kola nuts, palm oil, etc. And this “god of the state” was the imitation of the very powerful and most kind god or spirit of the river.

Special sacrifices were given to the god of the river once in a year. But many people were giving the god thank-offerings in addition. Of course, as he was kind, it was so he was cruel. Because sometimes he made the barren women to become mothers of children, and sometimes when he was cruel, he forced swimmers to drown and then dragged them to the place of his abode in the bottom of the river, and there he would detain them throughout their lives’ time. So when sacrifices were ready to be given to him in the year, a very big canoe would be carved from a mighty tree. Several kinds of bold images would be carved right round its body. Each of the images would be painted with different colours of paints, and the canoe itself would be beautifully painted both inside and outside. Then after, all of the sacrifices including one young man and one young lady were put in the canoe. Then many animals and fowls would be slaughtered. Having cooked their flesh and every one of the people having eaten it to his or her satisfaction, they would start to sing and dance round the canoe and also the “god of the state”.

Having sung, danced and drunk the palm-wine for a while, then one big ewe would be slaughtered in front of the “god of the state”. So having poured some of its blood on the “god of the state”, they would pour the rest on the heads of the young man and the lady who were dressed in beautiful clothes, etc. After that, the whole people would pray greedily to the god of the river to accept their sacrifices and to send peace and good health to them in return. Having prayed greedily like that for about twenty twinklings, then the drummers would start to beat their drums, and as the whole people started to sing the song of the god of the river loudly, some of the strong men would push the canoe to the middle of the river. As the water started to carry the canoe away gently, the drummers would continue to beat the drums and the rest of the people would continue to sing, dance, etc. until the canoe would be lost to their view. But as soon as the canoe was lost to their view, the people would continue to sing and dance as they were going back to the town.





When I Became a Hunter




When my father saw that I was stronger and braver than any of my playmates, and also saw that I was bold and stout, he bought one bow and a large quantity of arrows for me. He told me to go to the nearby jungle to hunt for wild beasts. So I was very happy when my father gave me the bow and arrows. But the people of my town were very surprised to see that I killed many kinds of wild beasts before I came back to the town.

Having seen this, both young and old people were afraid of me each time they saw me. As I continued to kill many of the wild animals every day for some months all of my friends deserted me, because they thought that sooner or later I might kill them as I was killing the wild animals in the jungle. But I recalled them with the flesh of the animals as soon as I understood what they thought about me. So as soon as they ate from the flesh of the animals they were no more afraid of me, and we continued to play together as before I became a hunter.





At Last I was Married to Lola




As soon as I became twenty years of age, I told my father and mother that I wanted to marry a girl. So both were happy to hear this from me and they told me that I should be looking for one, and they too would be looking for one so that I might choose one from the two. But I was greatly sad at last, because every girl that I approached used to run away from me with fear, for she thought I would kill her as I was killing the wild animals. But after a few months I did not bother whether a girl agreed to marry me or not, for I knew that the whole people of the town would soon realize the goodness which I was doing for them. Because their lives were saved considerably more now than before I started to kill the wild animals. The wild animals did not attempt to come to the town to kill people and domestic animals as before.

For the period of five years that I was killing these wild animals, the people of the town did not realize my work and none of the girls agreed to marry me each time that my father and mother spoke to them about me. Then one midnight, it came to my father’s mind that his closest friend, who was the progenitor, had one beautiful daughter who was not yet married to any man, although the progenitor had no other issue except Lola, the name of the daughter. So the following morning my father sent a message to the progenitor that he wanted to see him. But as my father and his friend, the progenitor, liked each other so much, it was not more than sixty twinklings before the progenitor came to him.

When my father’s friend, the progenitor, came and as both of them used to chat first immediately they saw each other, so he first shouted to my father: “Hello! the chief priest and pagan of gods, idols and spirits! How do you do? Hope there is no bad complaint from the gods, idols or spirits, this morning?” But the progenitor had hardly finished his chats when my father replied loudly with a smile: “Hello! the progenitor of the gods, idols and spirit-worshippers, there is no complaint at all! How do you feel this morning?”

Then after both had chatted together, the progenitor sat down on the mat on which my father sat. My father had not yet told him anything about his daughter, but he told me to bring the keg of the morning palm-wine. So I ran at the same time to the corner where the palm-wine was gushing out white lather from the spout of the keg. When I brought it, I put it down in front of them. After that I returned to the same corner, I brought two calabashes, and then I started to serve both of them with the wine continuously.

After some twinklings that everyone of them was satisfied, my father drew the bowl of “ayo” which was near him to the front of them (“AYO” is a kind of the Yoruba game; also called “warry”). Then both of them started to play the “ayo” as they were joking funnily and loudly.

After about forty twinklings, my father defeated his friend the progenitor, for three times consecutively. So this proved that the request which my father was going to make about the progenitor’s daughter would be successful. Then they stopped to play the “ayo” game, but as soon as they continued to drink the palm-wine my father disclosed what he had invited him for. He explained to him that he had tried for five years to get a lady for his son but he could not get one for him. So he would be happy if he, the progenitor, would agree for his son to marry his daughter. But when the progenitor heard this request from my father, he raised his head up. He thought this matter over for about two twinklings before he raised his head down again. Then he asked solemnly from my father why he could not get one lady for his son out of uncountable ladies who were in the Rocky Town, despite his being the chief priest and pagan of the town.

But my father did not waste time to explain to him that the reason why every one of the ladies feared to marry his son was that she thought his son would kill her as he was killing the wild animals in the jungles. When my father explained to the progenitor like that, without hesitation he said with happiness that he agreed to marry his daughter to his son. Having seen that his request was approved by the progenitor, his friend, my father thanked him greatly and he prayed for him for some sixtieths of a twinkling. Then both of them put the wedding-day for forty-two days’ time. After that they continued to play on the game “ayo” as I continued to serve them with the palm-wine. It was like that my father got a wife for me at last.

Both of them were still playing the “ayo” and drinking the wine until my mother returned from the farm, when it was at about the twelfth hour of the day. But when my father told her that his friend, the progenitor, had agreed for him to marry his daughter for me, she knelt down before the progenitor and thanked him greatly with happiness. So as soon as she stood up and went to the premises, she brought one big keg of the palm-wine for the progenitor, just to show him the appreciation of his only daughter that he had allowed me to marry.

Then my father and his friend, the progenitor, enjoyed themselves with the palm-wine and the “ayo” till the fifth hour of the evening. The progenitor returned to his house. Then the following morning he told his daughter that he wanted her to be my wife. But as she must not disobey her father’s wish, she agreed at the same time with happiness. So in the evening, I met her at her father’s house. We talked together and both of us agreed to marry together. But having spent some hours with her, I returned to the house late in the night. It was like that I continued to visit Lola every evening and both of us were talking happily for many hours before I returned to the house.

But as I was a BORN AND DIE BABY before I was born, a special sacrifice must be prepared and taken to the same “Iroko tree”, which was my former dwelling place or home from where I came into my mother’s womb, before I could marry a lady. This special sacrifice was to appease my “born and die baby” folks who were still expecting me to return to them. They were still living in the same “Iroko tree” until when they would be fortunate to find wealthy mothers.

If this sort of sacrifice was not taken to them at this time that I was preparing to marry, willing or not they would take my life so that I might return to them by force. But as my mother and father had already known the secret of the “born and die babies”, the right sacrifice was prepared. According to the custom of the “born and die babies”, my fiancée carried the sacrifice by the head, then her mother, her father, my mother, my father, the drummers and myself, danced with the sacrifice from the town to my former home which was the “Iroko tree” and which was on the outskirts of the town.

When the sacrifice was put down at the foot of the tree, all of us danced and sang round the tree for many twinklings. Then we danced back to the town with happiness because the sacrifice was accepted by my folks who were “born and die babies”.

Now, as the right sacrifice had been given to my folks who were the “born and die babies” when there remained two weeks to the day of my wedding, so the minds of my father and mother were then free to prepare for the day. And they were happy to announce the day to their friends, neighbours, etc. So when the day was reached, it was a great day indeed in the Rocky Town. For as noble people and common people of the town were full in my father’s house and in the front of the house, and as the drummers were beating their drums and the flatterers, etc. were flattering my father and mother and I, it was so for the house of the father of my fiancée. As the people were eating, drinking and the drums were beating and the whole of us were dancing merrily here and there, it was so they were doing in the house of my fiancée’s father.

This merriment continued on both sides till a late hour in the night. But according to our custom in the Rocky Town, every big merriment as this one must end in front of the “god of the state”. So as soon as it was midnight, the whole of us danced to the bank of the river where the “god of the state” stood sternly on its platform. After its own sacrifice was given to it, we danced round it merrily. Then my father, my mother, my fiancée’s father and mother prayed for both of us, and after we sang and danced for a few twinklings, then the whole of us danced back to the town. Again, having danced and sung to the whole parts of the town till a half of the day, we returned to the house, but we had hardly returned to the house when my wife was brought to my house.

But a few twinklings after my wife was brought, the noble and common people went back to their houses. It was like that I married the daughter of the progenitor of worshippers of gods, idols, spirits, etc.

Now as I was living with my wife, Lola, comfortably in my father’s house, I continued to go to the jungles and forests which surrounded the town. Before this time I had nearly killed all the wild beasts, but the remaining ones were still loitering under the mighty rocks, debris, etc. So I started to kill many of them in a day and I was bringing their bodies to the house for our food.

As I was still doing so, it was so my father who was the chief of priests, pagan, idol, spirit, etc. worshippers and my father-in-law who was the progenitor of the idol, spirit, etc. worshippers, did not fail to perform their duties as well. Because whenever one wanted to give sacrifice to his or her god or idol, etc. in the town, both of them would not keep long behind but they would go there as soon as they were informed. They would perform the sacrifices at the same time. For this, the whole people of the town feared and respected them as though they were the only omniscient persons in the town.





My Wife was Barren




Now I was fed up with my wife, I was not happy at all, because in the four years since I had married her she was not pregnant. My father, mother and father of my wife had tried all their efforts to make her pregnant by using almost all kinds of herbs, but all their efforts had failed. They consulted the spirit of the river but that one did not render any help.

So when I saw that both of them were fed up, I began to think in mind day and night as how to make her pregnant, because a woman or a man without even one issue would, in fact, have no respect or honour among his or her friends and neighbours, but he or she would live a sorrowful life throughout his or her life-time. And a person no matter how poor he or she was but with even one issue would live with happiness. This was a very serious custom of my town. We all admitted that “though, mother is gold but father is looking glass for the child”.

However, I began to implore my “Supreme Second” by both day and night to help me find a powerful herbalist who would make the medicine which would not fail to make my wife pregnant.





My Preparation for My Journey




Having thought for nights and days as how to make my barren wife pregnant, at last it came to my mind that the cause was from my side because I was a “born and die baby” before, who had betrayed many mothers and fathers of their property. Therefore the repercussions of what I had done to the innocent mothers and fathers must come upon me however it might be. But when I remembered this, I became extremely sad. However, when it was daybreak, I asked from my father with sadness, where was the most powerful herbalist who would not fail to make my wife pregnant. My father said that there was one who had never failed to do everything. He explained further that she was called “THE WITCH-HERBALIST” and that her town was called “THE REMOTE TOWN”. My father said that her town was in the remote part of the world and that it was very dangerous to go there because of the dangers and the cruel strange beings of the jungles, forests, etc. through which one must travel to the town.

My father explained further that to reach the town would take one up to six years or more. But it was not certain that one who set his or her foot on a journey to the town could reach there because of the dangers, etc. of the road, etc., thus my father explained to me.

But once I was told that this Witch-Herbalist who was the omniscient and omnipotent mother of the Remote Town, had never failed to solve any problem which was on earth, I did not care about setting my feet on this long journey. I made up my mind to go and see her at all costs, though to travel such a long journey as that at this time was greatly risky.

As soon as I was told of this powerful Witch-Herbalist, I did not waste time in inviting my mother, father, my wife, her father and mother to my room on the third evening after I had heard this information from my father. When all of them sat down, I prostrated for every one of them but excluding my wife. I prayed for all of them for all the help which they had rendered to my wife in order for her to be pregnant, before they became fed up. Then I sat down before them, and then I told them that I had made up my mind to go and see the Witch-Herbalist. I told them further that I was preparing to leave the town the day of the next market-day, to which there remained six days at that time.

But I wondered greatly that I had hardly explained to them like that when my father-in-law said that he too had been hearing of the Witch-Herbalist for a number of years, that she was an omniscient and omnipotent old woman. He warned me not to attempt to go to her, and he warned me further that it was possible for her to detain me in her town because her witch-craft sometimes made her mad. But of course I knew that he simply frightened me to tell me this. I told them that if my “Supreme Second” was kind enough, he would lead me throughout my journey without hurt. It was so I replied to my father-in-law and my father, mother and my wife. He said further that the reason why many people had not attempted to go there was that there was a cruel jungle being who was living in the cave near the path which was at a distance of ten days’ journey from this our town. The father of my wife warned me seriously that this cruel jungle being, if I was unfortunate, might come out from his place of abode at the very time that I was passing through that area.

I nearly gave up going to see the Witch-Herbalist when my father and my wife’s father told me the dangers of the travel and of the witch mother, especially when my mother and my wife burst into tears and were warning me not to go. But later on I did not bother or change my mind to go. Instead, I made it clear to them that so far as I was a hunter of the wild animals and as I had several kinds of juju, I was not afraid at all to go. Of course when I told them like that with bravery, they stopped to warn me again, and they prayed for me that I should reach there and return to them safely. After that both of them left my room and went to the front of the house, except my mother and wife.

After my father and his friend had left the room they sat by the front of the house and both were drinking the palm-wine. I told my mother that she and my wife should go and prepare a rich sacrifice, and take it to my folks who were the “born and die babies” and who were living inside the “Iroko tree” which was my former house. I told them further that if they do so, surely there would be no harm for me throughout my journey. So my mother and my wife were happy when I told them like that. Then both of them left my room.

So it was from that moment I started to prepare many kinds of juju and many other things which could help me on my journey. But before the day of my leaving was reached, my mother and wife had prepared the sacrifice and taken it to the “Iroko tree” inside of which my folks, the “born and die babies”, were lodging till the day they would find a wealthy woman. This sacrifice was to appease them so that they might help me to conquer all of the evils, ghosts, spirits and all other harmful enemies of the road who might want to disturb me on my journey.

When there remained two days to the day that I wanted to start my journey, I sharpened my heavy matchet very well, I put it in its sheath, I made a very strong bow with many poisonous arrows. Then I roasted with the palm-oil, plenty of meat of the wild animals which I had killed the day previously. I wrapped it with the dried broad leaves and I tightened it tightly with rope. Having done that and kept it in my room, I went to the market. I bought one big cruse which was for the medicine which the Witch-Herbalist would give me for my wife, and I kept it in my room as well. Again, I did not forget that I would need fire greatly on my journey. So I went around the house and I found many flinty stones. I picked two which I supposed would not fail to produce fire whenever I struck one on the other. After that, I ground plenty of pepper into powder, I wrapped it with dried broad leaves and then I kept it in my room.

When I had prepared everything ready, I packed it all into one huge bag, except my juju and the cruse which I put in a separate bag. And I leaned my heavy matchet and bow and arrows of poison on these two bags. In the evening, my father who was the chief of pagan, idol, spirit, god, etc. worshippers, and my father-in-law who was the progenitor of the pagan, idol, spirit, god, etc. worshippers, and also my mother, my wife and her mother, took me to the shrines of the god of iron and god of thunder which were at the bank of the river. Many old men and women followed us to the river as well.

Then without hesitation, my father told me to kneel down before the god of iron. He and my father-in-law prayed for me for ten twinklings while the rest of the people said: “Let it be so, oh god of iron!” And after this we went to the shrine of the god of thunder, which belonged to my mother. She prayed warmly for me for many sixtieths of a twinkling, before the god and the people said: “Let it be so, oh god of thunder!” In their prayers, they said: “The more the thorns never disturb snakes in the bush from gliding, the more there would be no obstacles on your journey! Or if there are, your ‘Supreme Second’ will help you to conquer all! As you volunteer your life for the dangers of your journey in order to make your barren wife pregnant, the god of iron will help you throughout your journey! Even the god of iron and the god of thunder have promised that you would reach the Town of the Witch-Herbalist safely and that you would return to us safely as well! And both have assured us further that your mission with the Witch-Herbalist would be favourable by the help of your wife’s ‘Supreme Second’! But both the god of iron and god of thunder have warned you seriously that you must obey the instructions which the Witch-Herbalist would give you, otherwise a serious thing would certainly happen to you when you return!”

Then as soon as my father, my mother and my father-in-law had explained to me like that, one big dog was slaughtered for the god of iron as its sacrifice. The blood of the dog was poured on top of it while some of it was poured on my head, on both arms and legs.

After that, my mother gave me three thunderbolts and she told me to use them as explosive substance as well whenever I met any danger. And after this, the whole of us sang and danced back to my father’s house when it was the seventh hour of the morning.





I Left My Town

for the Remote Town




Now as it was forbidden for me to sit down again once the sacrifice had been given to the god of iron in respect of me or one who was going on a long journey like me, so immediately we returned to the house, I entered my room and I first drank one keg of the palm-wine. Then I wore my hunting dresses, I wore many kinds of juju in my loin, I wore many on my neck, both on my elbows and limbs. Several others which were the skulls of snakes, birds of prey, lizards, etc. were tied on my huge cap and I put it on my head. Having dressed like that, I took my bow and the poisonous arrows. Many kinds of juju were tied on every part of the bow as well. Then I hung the bow and arrows and my long and heavy matchet on my left shoulder. Then I put the juju ring which could make a person invisible on one of my left fingers.

After, I put my roasted meat, some fresh yams, the parcel of ground pepper, the large cruse, the two flinty stones, etc. and the rest of my juju inside the huge bag which was made from the leather of a wild beast which I had killed long ago. So I hung this huge bag on my left shoulder as well. Having equipped myself like that, again I drank one keg of the palm-wine. Then I took out the heavy matchet from its sheath, I held it with the right hand and then I staggered from my room to the outside of the house. And at the same time, as the custom of the Town under the Rock or Rocky Town was, I knelt down before my father, mother, the father of my wife and other people who had been waiting for me in front of the house to pray for me, and to bid me goodbye.

As I knelt down before the people, and as I began to shake from feet to head for the intoxication of the powers of all the juju which I wore and as well for the power of the strong palm-wine which I had drunk in the room, so they all prayed for me. After the prayer, each of the people including my mother, father, my wife, her mother and her father, hung several kinds of juju gourds all over my dresses, head, neck, breast, loin, etc. After all these juju gourds were offered, I did not waste time at all but I stood up and I started my journey immediately.

As they were accompanying me along, it was so I was bidding them goodbye, and they too were bidding me goodbye and safe journey. But my mother, my wife and many other people were weeping bitterly as they were accompanying me along to the outskirts of the town. I did not bother for that at all. Instead, I was just going along as quickly as I could. But of course I knew that they were weeping bitterly for the hardships, difficulties, dangers, bad spirits, ghosts and the wild jungle people who, they believed, I was going to meet on the way before reaching the Remote Town, if I was fortunate to reach there. But as for me, I had made up my mind ready to face whatever might disturb me on the way.

It was like that my mother, father, wife, my father-in-law, mother-in-law and several other people led me to the outskirts of the town with grief. And again, on the outskirts of the town, the whole of them prayed for me with tears that my “Supreme Second” would guide me to the Witch-Herbalist and that he would also guide me back to them. They did all this because they were afraid that if I failed to return it would be a great grief to them. When they had accompanied me to the outskirts of the town, I bade them the last goodbye and they too bade me goodbye reluctantly. But as the whole of them burst into tears again, I turned my back to them. I faced the path which went to the town of the Witch-Herbalist. I began to walk along as quickly as I could and then they turned their backs to me and went back to the town reluctantly. It was like that I left my Rocky Town that morning for the Remote Town of the Witch-Herbalist, who I believed, would help me to make my barren wife pregnant.

Although I had left my town without human wayfarers or partners, my first “mind” and my second “mind” were my partners, while the third partner which was my “memory” had also prepared itself ready to help me perhaps whenever my two “minds” failed to advise or deserted me. And it was also prepared to record all the offences which the two “minds” might commit. Again, my fourth partner was my “Supreme Second” who was totally invisible and who was entirely supreme to the three of them, yet he had prepared himself ready to guide me throughout my journey.





The Brutal Ape




Soon all of the people were lost to my view and I too was lost to their view. Now, it remained me alone on the road except for my first “mind”, second “mind” and my “memory” which were now my partners, and the three of them were my advisers as well. But my “Supreme Second” was my guard though he was invisible.

I kept going along on the road as quickly as I could so that I might be able to travel very far away from my town before the nightfall, and also to be able to travel to such a suitable safe place where I could sleep in the night. It was so I was travelling on and on, on this clear road, till when it was the second hour of the afternoon. As I continued to travel along, it was so my first “mind” and second “mind” were advising me repeatedly that I must not stop till nightfall. I did not pay heed to their advice at first, but of course they were for me just as if I were with persons.

Although I had two “minds” in me, the first one which was in the left was not so reliable sometimes. It misled me to do wrong things, but its advice was useful sometimes. But the second one which was in the right was very reliable. It spoke the truth always. Whenever both of them deserted me when I was in dangers, my “memory” never deserted me and it did not fail or forget to record down the offences which each of the two “minds” committed.

Fortunately, as this time was the middle part of the dry season, it enabled me to travel very far away from my town before that second hour of the afternoon. But immediately my second “mind” told me that it was the second hour of the afternoon, and as I was terribly hungry for food, I stopped under the shadow of a big tree without following the advice of my first “mind” and second “mind”. This big tree had plenty of long and spread branches on top. As its leaves were broad, it was so some of its branches were spread to the road and were also spread on the brook which was behind it, at a little distance of about three hundred metres.

The sun was as hot as fire this day and it had nearly dried me up like a cloth. But every part of my body became very cool as soon as I stopped under this tree. After I had enjoyed this cool shadow of the tree for some twinklings of standing, I put all my loads down and then I sat on a white-ant mound which was also under the tree. As I sat down on the mound, I leaned my back on the other part of it which was bent backward like an easy-chair, with the hope to enjoy more cool breeze before I ate my food. Although I did not hear the voice of any living creature at first, this did not frighten me at all. But my first “mind” told me that something would happen to me if I kept too long there, and at the same time, my second “mind” confirmed that though something might happen to me I would conquer it at last. So when my second “mind” had confirmed it like that, I did not bother to leave there until I was satisfied.

When I had rested for about sixty twinklings under this tree, I loosened my bag which I put down closely at my right side. I took one roasted meat from it and I ate it to my satisfaction. After that, I stood up, I took my heavy matchet and then I went to the brook which was behind this tree. As I stood on the bank of the brook, I began to crane at every part of the jungle with fear, thinking that perhaps there might be some dangerous beings. But when I was quite sure that there was no living being or anything which was dangerous, I bent down and I drank the water from the brook to my satisfaction before I came back cautiously to the tree. To my surprise, as soon as I sat on the white-ant mound and leaned my back on the other part of it, I was not aware when sleep took me away.

As this sleep was so nice to me, within half a twinkling, I began to dream. And in this dream, I saw that I was being chased about the edge of the brook by many wild animals wishing to kill me. All of them were those which I had killed long ago in my town. So without hesitation, as I had no bow and arrows in my dream, I began to fight them with bare hands. And after some twinklings’ fight, I overpowered many of them, and I killed them at last, and so many of them escaped with fear. But the most powerful of them, which did not fear me, was a very stout ape. He did not run away from me but he faced me to fight as soon as the rest had run away for their lives.

As he faced me to fight, and as he was too fearful for me, I jumped down with fear from the mound on which I slept and then I woke. When I opened my eyes, my dream became the truth, because I saw an ape who stood firmly before me. At the same time, he clutched my bag of juju, the bag in which I kept my roasted meat and many other things, and he took my matchet as well. So having seen him do so, I feared so much that I did not know what to do next except to run away for my life. But as I stood up suddenly and I started to run away, he hastily put my property which he had seized down near a tree. Then without hesitation, he started to chase me along fiercely to catch me. As he was very powerful, he overtook me within a few twinklings. And as his hands were touching my occiput slightly just to hold it and then drag me back, I put on more speed, although I had become entirely tired by this time, yet fear forced me to run after him again to a little distance.

Having seen this, he became angrier and he put on more efforts, he overtook me once more. Without hesitation, he gripped my head and then he started to drag me back to the spot where he had put my property.

When he had dragged me mercilessly to that spot, he did not waste time but he clutched my heavy matchet and then he started to beat me with it at the same time. Having beaten me mercilessly for about thirty twinklings, he forced me to sit down on the ground before the big tree and he too sat down in front of me. As he was still resting, my second “mind” became active now, and it told me that after this brutal ape had rested, he would kill me right out. So as I had no chance to take or to use one or two of my juju, I must use my personal power and with that I would conquer him, thus my second “mind” advised me to do.

As soon as my second “mind” advised me of what to do to save myself from this brutal ape, I became so brave and wild, especially when it came to my “memory” that I was a brave hunter in my town and that I had killed uncountable wild beasts of all kinds. So with bravery, I jumped on this cruel ape unexpectedly. I held his head with all my power, and just as I was trying to strangle him to death at the same time, he sprang up with all his power. As he sprang up unexpectedly, I fell down to a distance of six metres in front of him. I fell down so heavily that both my arms were nearly broken.

But as at this time I did not care for any consequence, I sprang up at the same time. I went back to him and then I stood ready before him as I began to give him the sign with hands to let us continue our fight. I gave him the sign with hands because as he was an animal, he could not understand me if I spoke to him by mouth. But I had hardly made the sign to him with hands when he jumped on me again, and at the same time he started to wrestle me with rage. So both of us were wrestling here and there and also round the big tree several times in a moment. We did so for more than twenty twinklings, yet he could not knock me down and I too failed to knock him down each time that each of us tried to do so.

Having tried with all his power to lift the whole of me off the ground and knock me down to death but failed, I too failed to do the same thing for him. Then he held my head steadily with both hands. He held it so tightly with all his power that his eyes were closed tightly without his wish. And it was so too that I held his own neck with both hands, and then both of us were now moving heavily about on the same spot. I did not allow him to go and he too did not release me to go away.

After a while, as both of us were still moving about on that spot heavily and each one of us was perspiring continuously, we moved to the spot where he had put my matchet. As soon as I opened my eyes slightly and saw it, then without hesitation, I raised it up from the ground with my left foot.

Then I hastily loosened my right hand from his neck and I gripped the matchet. So I started to cut his neck at the same time with it. But he hastily loosened both his hands from my neck as soon as he felt severe pain at his neck and also saw the blood which was gushing out on to the ground. So without attempting to do anything again or to wait and revenge on me, he started to run away for his life. I chased him to kill him but I could not overtake him as he disappeared into the jungle.

But as soon as he had disappeared into the jungle, I returned to the spot where he had put all my property. I took all and then I continued my journey at the same time.

This was the first hardship that I met in my journey since when I had left my town. Though this brutal ape wounded me I conquered him at last. But before I left the spot I thanked my “Supreme Second” greatly for helping me to conquer the brutal ape.





Abnormal Squatting Man

of the Jungle




Having continued my journey on this path for about one hundred and twenty twinklings, without either meeting or seeing any kind of living creature on this path, I stopped by a small rock which was near the path. Then I climbed it and I put my juju-bag, food-bag and other property on top of it. Then I sat down and after I had rested for some twinklings, I loosened my bag, I took out one big yam, one roasted meat, ground pepper, palm-oil and the two flinty stones. When I had put all down, I went round, I collected some dried sticks and refuse and then I returned to the top of the rock. Having arranged all of the dried sticks and the refuse together, then I struck the two flinty stones on each other until the fire came out from them onto the sticks and refuse.

As soon as the fire had enough flames, I put the big yam in it. After that I started to warm the palm oil and the roasted meat in the fire until the yam was roasted enough. When I had put all down before the fire, I went to the nearby tree which had broad leaves, I cut some of them and returned to the fire. I laid them on the ground and I put the roasted meat, some ground pepper and oil on them. After that I peeled the yam, I sliced it and then I put it on the leaves as well. I used these broad leaves as a plate. Having done all this as hastily as possible, because I was terribly hungry for food at this time, I began to eat them at the same time, and within a few twinklings I finished all. But I had hardly finished my food when the dark of the night came.

When the night met me on this rock and I could not see well, my first “mind” told me that as I could not travel further, it was better to sleep on top of this rock. But my first “mind” had hardly advised me like that when my second “mind” interrupted. It said that it would be a great punishment to me if I slept on this rock that night, because a cruel man of the jungle, who was squatting about in the night, was living near the rock. So he would come out in the night and punish me even nearly to death, but anyhow I would be free from him at last. My second “mind” which was not misleading me warned me like that.

But of course, I greatly feared when my second “mind” disclosed what would happen to me in the night if I slept on that rock, because it was not misleading me at any time, like the first “mind” which was sometimes misleading. Well, as I was totally tired and weak before I came to this rock because I had used all my power when I fought with the brutal ape, and as I could not continue my journey further for tiredness and weariness, this forced me to sleep on this rock.

So having rested for about one hundred and twenty twinklings without hearing even the noise of an insect, I lay down near my bag of food. I used the bag of juju as a pillow, while I put my heavy matchet and bow and arrows of poison closely to my right hand. Having done all that, I faced the sky and then I began to think with fear about the squatting man of the jungle of whom my second “mind” had told me, and also about all the dangers which were ahead before I could reach the Remote Town of the Witch-Herbalist.

As I was still thinking seriously about these obstacles, I slept unnoticed. But to my horror, as I was still enjoying the sleep for about sixty twinklings, a fearful and very cold hand struck at my breastbone heavily. This strange hand was so heavy and cold like an ice block that I woke from sleep at the same time. As I opened my eyes and sat upright with great fear, I saw a horrible black being who squatted very closely to me. But as I sat upright with the fear which began to shake my body, and as I fastened my eyes on him though it was very dark, I began to think whether I was dreaming.

I was hardly confused like that when I began to feel cold. This was not the cold of the night but the strange cold which was pouring out from the stomach of this squatting man of the jungle. Within half of a twinkling, I could not bear this sort of cold at all, because my body became so cold unexpectedly that I began to shiver from head to feet.

I felt that my hands, feet, neck and every part of my body was becoming so stiff that it was hardly possible for me to move it. Having seen how things went from bad to worse, then I stretched my right hand just to take the bag of my juju, with the hope of taking one of the juju from it to use it for this squatting man of the jungle, perhaps it would drive him away. But to my fear, my hand could not hold anything again for it had become too stiff immediately this squatting man turned his face to the bag of juju and blew the cold to that place. Perhaps he knew what I wanted to take from the bag, I did not know.

Again, as my right hand had failed to take one of the juju from the bag, I forced my left hand to my right side where I had put my matchet and bow and arrows before I slept. Although after several twinklings’ struggle, I forced the left hand to the matchet, as soon as I wanted to hold its handle, I saw through the thick darkness that this fearful and cruel squatting man had hastily turned his face to that spot. He blew the cold there as well, and he had hardly done so, when my left hand ran so cold from shoulder to fingers that it became so stiff that I could not hold the matchet at all. So willing or not, I left this my left hand on that spot. Probably this cruel squatting man knew that I wanted to matchet him, I did not understand.

Now as both my arms were so stiff that they were stretched permanently to both my sides, so I did not know what to do next, to defend myself from this squatting man. I faced him as he squatted closely to me, I began to ask from my first “mind” and second “mind” what could I do to save me from this abnormal huge and cruel squatting man of the jungle? Because both my arms were now too stiff to take either my juju or matchet, or bow and arrows with which to fight him. At this moment, my first “mind” hastily advised me that if this squatting man spared my life this night or let me go away safely, I should discontinue my journey but I should return from that place to my town at the same time. My first “mind” advised me further that I should not bother whether my wife was pregnant or not.

But at the same time, my second “mind” advised me that I should object to my first “mind’s” advice, because it would be a great shame to me if I returned to my town without reaching the Remote Town of the Witch-Herbalist and bringing the medicine which could make my wife pregnant, for the people of the town were expecting me to return to them with such medicine. My second “mind” explained further that it was impossible for the huge and cruel squatting man to kill me because as my juju were near me, though they were in the bag, they were defending me miraculously. The squatting man would only torture me till when the morning-sun appeared on the sky. Again, my “Supreme Second” would save me as well, thus my second “mind” advised me.

But to my fear and embarrassment again, my second “mind” had hardly advised me like that and I had agreed to its advice when this cruel squatting man of the jungle blew heavy cold to my face and breast unexpectedly, and then all became as stiff as dried sticks at the same time. Now my first and second “minds” could not help me to decide anything as before, except my “memory”, but as I believed that my “Supreme Second” was not far from me, things would not be too bad for me until daybreak.

Now, I could not bend or move both arms, neck or all parts of my body. And I was just looking at the squatting man with my stiff eyes which I had opened widely before they became stiff. I saw him plainly now that he scowled at my face, and he was a stalwart squatting man who could easily tear even an elephant into several pieces within a sixtieth of a twinkling. He did not wear clothes, but very long hair covered some parts of his body. His head was bigger than necessary with two fearful eyes. The two eyes went deeply into his skull. The hair on his head was so long that it covered his breast. It was muddled together as if it was rubbed with a large quantity of thick grease. He had a long moustache which was spread to a distance of about thirty centimetres and it parted to left and right.

The belly of this cruel ABNORMAL SQUATTING WILD MAN OF THE JUNGLE was so big and swelled out that it was touching the ground. Through the moon-beam which had just appeared in the sky in the midnight, I saw him clearly. His beard was long to about forty centimetres, it was very bushy and stale, and hundreds of fleas were moving here and there in it. But his thick and twisted arms and legs were able to carry his over-inflated belly, from which he used to blow out the cold onto his victims. Of course I could not see his ears because of his muddled dirty hair which entirely covered both.

The other parts of his body which were not covered by the muddled dirty hair, were full of big smelling mumps. To my surprise and fear when he was aloof, he seemed a powerless, morbid, wild jungle man. But it was very dangerous for one to approach him unless one who saw him aloof took to his or her heels at the same time. Furthermore, he had another trick with which he lured his victims. Some time when the day was lurid, and as the hair which covered his head and body was just like light brown weeds, he used to lurk in the weeds for his victim, and when the victim came near him, he jumped on him or her unexpectedly and then started to blow the cold onto his or her body as hastily as he could. Again, he pretended sometimes to be motley, or when he saw one at a distance he burst into silly laughter suddenly as if he was mad. But as soon as that person began to look at him with all his or her attention, he jumped on him or her unexpectedly. It was thus he was also catching his victims.

But as he continued to torture me that night, as soon as he had paralysed every part of my body with the cold which he was blowing heavily and continuously onto my body for about one hundred and twenty twinklings, he stopped doing so, but he started to speak the language which I did not understand at all. His voice was so strange and fearful to me that I began to squirm as I was then squinting at him with great fear, although I could not move any part of my body.

It was not so long after this cruel Abnormal Squatting Wild Man began to speak squeakingly, that the cold water began to spurt from every part of his body continuously as if one was speaking with great annoyance for a long time. Having spoken greedily to himself for a while, he became extremely annoyed suddenly and then he began to strike my head with his long brown upper teeth without mercy. I was so much afraid and felt pain at this time that I was not aware when I fainted. I thought he was going to eat me and go away, but instead, he continued to treat me badly. Of course, he was never hungry for food whenever he was punishing his victims, for this was his happiness and favourite food and drink.

As I was still faint and he continued to punish me, God was so good, he did not bite my head till daybreak. As this time was the middle part of the dry season, so it was hardly daybreak when the hot sun appeared in the sky unexpectedly and it shone on both of us. But as he could not remain so long in the heat of the sun, otherwise his large belly would burst at the same time. He ran away to his unknown place of abode and he left me there helplessly.

Luckily, when the sun had heated my body for a few twinklings, I woke from fainting and I could move every part of my body as I liked. So I stood up, I hastily packed up my juju-bag, food-bag, bow and arrows. I hung all on my shoulders except the heavy matchet which I held. But as I wanted to leave that spot and continue my journey, my first “mind” reminded me now that as I was a brave hunter in my Rocky Town, and as I had plenty of juju, I should try to find the Abnormal Squatting Man of the Jungle, to fight him to death in return for all the punishments which he had given me. While my first “mind” reminded me like that, I did not know when I replied loudly as if I talked to a person: “Yes, you are right. I must pursue him to revenge on him!”

But as I was preparing to put all my loads down from my shoulders and then to start to find him, again, my second “mind” reminded me that I should not bother to revenge on him that day, but I should continue my journey at once for I would soon get a good chance to revenge on him. Again, this my second “mind” reminded me further that to make my barren wife pregnant was more important. So when my second “mind” reminded me like that, I replied at the same time: “Yes, you are right! What a man wants is more important than himself. Thank you!” Thus I replied to my second “mind” as if it was a person.

Then without wasting a sixtieth of a twinkling, I continued my journey without paying heed to my first “mind’s” advice because it was too misleading. As I was travelling now along on the rough path, it was so I was looking at my back with fear several times in a twinkling just to make sure whether the cruel Abnormal Squatting Man was coming to harm me again.





The End of the Path




Now I began to travel along as fast as I could so that I might be able to travel very far away from the area where the Abnormal Squatting Man of the Jungle was living. So I did not stop to eat or rest till the half of the day, although I was terribly hungry for food and I was also tired and weary.

When it was a few twinklings after mid-day, willing or not, the hunger and weariness forced me to stop. So as I was still looking here and there for the fear of the cruel Abnormal Squatting Man, I stopped under a tree which was at the side of the rough path. Having put my property under this tree, I went around it, and I collected plenty of dried twigs. I made the fire at once in which I roasted one big yam and then I warmed one of the roasted meats. Having done that, I ate all to my satisfaction. And then I rested for a while, though with the fear of the Squatting Man. I stood up, I went to the pool of water which was near that spot. I drank the cold water from the pool to my satisfaction. Fortunately, pools, brooks, streams, etc. were very common in this jungle.

Then I returned to the tree and sat down with the hope of resting for a few twinklings before continuing my journey. I was not aware when I fell down and slept, it was so I enjoyed the sleep till the following morning. When I awoke, I feared greatly, I thought I was still in the hands of the Squatting Man. But within a few twinklings, my mind became at rest at last when I wiped my eyes with my palms several times and saw that I was not in his hands at all.

So before I continued my journey this morning, I roasted another yam and I warmed one big roasted meat. I ate them with the ground pepper and with some of the palm-oil which was also in my food-bag. Then as soon as I had satisfied my hunger and had gained new strength, I gathered all my belongings, I hung all on both my shoulders except the matchet which I held with the right hand. Then I continued my journey when it was at the tenth hour of the morning. But when I had travelled as fast as I could till the second hour of the afternoon, a strange thing happened which added to my fear. The rough path on which I had been travelling from my town the several days since I had left there, came to an end unexpectedly.

I was so much discouraged when I travelled to the end of this path this day, especially when I remembered the dangers, hardships, punishments, difficulties, etc. which I had encountered even on the path. But how then would be the dangers, hardships, punishments, difficulties, etc., etc. of the wild jungles, forests, deserts, etc., etc? There was no road or path on which to travel as before. Now, as I sat down with sorrow at the end of this path and I thought over of all these things with great depression, my first “mind” advised me to return from there to my town. But as soon as I wanted to accept the advice of my first “mind”, although it was too misleading and confusing, my second “mind” hastily advised me that I should not mind my first “mind” but I should continue my journey and that there would be no harm for me at all and that I would overcome all the dangerous wild people of the jungles, etc. Thus my second “mind” gave me assurance this day. After that it turned to the first “mind” and started to warn it that it should stop forthwith discouraging me.

Then as my second “mind” had given me sound assurance of success, I stood up with all my property on both shoulders, and with happiness I continued my journey into the wild jungle which started at the end of the rough path. As I began to travel along in it with much difficulty from the uncountable twigs of trees which obstructed my way, it was so that I was peeping at everywhere with fear although I had armed myself, and I also appreciated my second “mind’s” advice. It was so that I was travelling on and on in this wild jungle which belonged to only wild, cruel, etc. people who were living together with the immortal beings of the wild jungles.





The Wild Jungle Wealthy People




I travelled with many difficulties, etc. till the sixth hour of the evening, without seeing or meeting either dangerous wild people of the wild jungle or other kinds of jungle beings. The darkness came all over this wild jungle. Then, whether I liked it or not, I stopped at the foot of a white rock. I had hardly stopped there when I began to think with fear and with the head which I was raising up and down with confusion, whether to climb this white rock, and sleep on top of it. Perhaps by so doing, I might be safe from the punishments of the wild people and the other dangerous beings. But as I stood there and I did not know what to do yet, my first “mind” advised me to climb this strange rock to the top and sleep on it and I would be safe.

Although this my first “mind” was giving me right advice sometimes, it was sometimes misleading me. So I did not pay heed to its advice this evening. Instead, I was waiting for the advice of the second “mind” which was giving me correct advice always. However, having waited for my second “mind” to tell me what to do, it did not say anything at this moment. I sold my fear and death and then I climbed this strange white rock to the topmost point of it. Then I put all my belongings down, and sat near them. When I had rested for a while, I began to think of the wild people of these wild jungles, who always hated the people of the towns, cities, etc. and were so cruel to them. But as I continued to think like that, my second “mind” became active now. It explained to me that the reason the wild people of the wild jungles hated the people of the towns, cities, etc. was that we were claiming that we were superior to them, wiser and cleaner than them. That was the reason why they were punishing us to death whenever they met us, thus my second “mind” explained to me.

But when I heard from my second “mind” the reason why the wild people of the wild jungles were punishing the people of the towns, cities, etc. to death, again, I began to think of how that strange white rock came to be there, because such as this precious rock should not, by any means, be in a wild jungle or at the bank of a stream as this. For it was as white as snow and it was dazzling at some twinklings’ intervals. The brilliancy around it was travelling to a distance of about one kilometre with the colours such as copper, gold, silver, brass, crimson, snow, yellow, red, blue, green, orange, etc.

As I was still thinking in “memory” with great wonder and confusion and also with fear, about this wonderful white rock, it came to my “memory” again unexpectedly about the stream at the bank of which this white rock stood firmly. Then without hesitation, I took my “memory” and eyes to it. So through the brilliancy of the rock, I saw how this stream was flowing along to the north part of this wild jungle. Its water was very clean and it was making several kinds of lovely noises which were just lovely music of the wild people of the wild jungles.

Having looked at the stream and listened to the lovely noises for a while, I took my eyes away from it. I was badly hungry for food before climbing this rock. So I did not waste time to make fire in which I roasted one yam. But as “there is nothing else which can enter into the stomach when hunger is in it”, I ate the yam to my satisfaction first before I continued to listen to the lovely noises which were just like multi-music. Having hesitated and listened for some sixtieths of a twinkling, I heard very well now that the lovely noises were real music. In this music, all kinds of this-worldly instruments such as harps, bands, guitars, etc. were included. Also, all kinds of the songs which were sung in the whole world’s languages were included.

As the songs were singing in all languages of this world in baritone, bass, treble, etc. etc., it was so the instruments of all races were playing continuously. So as the night went deeply it was so the music was full in the air and around this white rock. And it was hearing clearly at a distance of three kilometres. My surprise and fear this night was that every living human being who listened to these songs would easily recognize his or her own town’s songs clearly among the others. He or she could also easily recognize his or her own native drums or other kinds of instruments from the rest. This kind of lovely music could make one who heard it but did not dance to it, mad.

Now, I hesitated again with wonder and I was dauntless for anything which might happen to make me miss all these strange lovely happenings. But after a while, I understood that the lovely music was coming from a long distance and not from the stream or from the white rock as I had supposed it to be.

When it was exactly at the first hour of the morning, the lovely music came in full onto the top of the water of the fast-flowing stream. And within a few twinklings more, it was hearing clearer and louder, so loud that the air was full of music more than before. Now, I paid more attention in keeping watch of this stream, thinking that probably I might see those who were playing the lovely music. But to my surprise, I did not see anyone. Although there was dark all over that area, I could see what was happening there through the brilliancy of the white rock. At last, and to my surprise, as I was still keeping watch of this stream with all my attention, there I saw unexpectedly that multi-coloured floodlights were spread all over the stream. These kinds of floodlights which I had never seen in my life, shone brightly to every part of this stream and that area as well. Each of its colours was changing to a more lovely colour as the music went up and down.

As I stood upright on top of the white rock I was craning at these wonderful floodlights with confusion. I was also thinking in “memory” that the white rock was most marvellous of its kind, and that these floodlights were the most wonderful of their kind.

I still diverted the whole of my attention to the strange things which were happening on this fast-flowing stream. The sounds of the various kinds of drums and songs were becoming louder gradually, as if they had been far away but were now coming nearer and nearer. Within a few sixtieths of a twinkling my first “mind” began to ask from me: “What kind of wild jungle beings are playing this kind of a lovely music and singing the lovely songs in the night like this?” And as soon as I started to explain to it: “Perhaps they may be the wild people who were playing the music and singing the lovely songs!”, I saw uncountable faint shadows which were appearing from sundown of this wild jungle. But those who were playing the music and singing the lovely songs had not yet appeared, except the music and songs were still hearing louder and louder.

As soon as the faint shadows appeared they were divided or separated into groups and each group went to a different part of the stream. Then each group sat in a circle on high stools while a big round table was before them. Both stools and the round table for each group were on top of the stream. And it was at this time I recognized that they were the wealthy wild people. I wondered greatly that the fast-flowing water did not carry them away or even shake them. But now, just as my second “mind” was assuring me that I should not be afraid of these shadows because they were superable wild people, though they were wealthy, my first “mind” hastily reminded me that although the wild people are superable, I must not forget at all that I am going to the Witch-Herbalist in order to make the medicine which would make my barren wife pregnant! But as soon as my first “mind” had reminded me like that, I saw clearly that each of the groups began to whisper to one another as if they had seen me on top of the white rock. And I was much afraid because of this.

To my surprise, immediately the musicians appeared on top of the running water, I saw now, when the multi-coloured floodlights were shone onto every part of the stream, that some of these wealthy wild people were of yellow complexion, black complexion, etc.

The multi-coloured floodlights which were shone onto them and onto other surroundings, made each of them so beautiful that there was nobody who could believe at this moment that they were wild people of the wild jungle, especially as every one of them wore very costly garments, etc. of their own race. And also every one of them put on neck, wrists, ankles, etc. the most costly gold, corals, diamonds, silver, etc. and the kind of cap on each head was just like a crown of a king. Having seen all these costly dresses which every one of these wild people wore, I believed that they were really supreme wealthy wild people of the sundown of this wild jungle who came to perform a very important ceremony on this stream that night. But this kind of rich ceremony was not yet known to me.

Fears and wonders had already paralysed the whole of me as I stood on top of this dazzling white rock, and I had already become dumb as I was looking at these coloured wild people this night. There I saw again that uncountable of the coloured wild people who were playing the lovely music arrived on top of the water with their instruments on hands, shoulders, etc. While they were still playing on they divided in groups. Each group went to each group of the wild wealthy people. They sat on stools a little distance from them as they were still playing on.

As soon as these wealthy people of the jungle had arrived and divided in groups, and were seated on stools of gold and silver, and their musicians were seated but at a little distance from each of the groups, then they stopped the variety of music which they were playing as they were arriving. Immediately they stopped playing everyone became quiet. There I saw that the whole groups of these wealthy jungle people stood up, and their musicians stood up later as well. All of them turned their faces to the dazzling white rock on top of which I stood and kept watching this kind of supervention all the while. Then all of them paid attention for a few sixtieths of a twinkling before they bowed, and then one of them who was the most supreme shouted greatly three times.

After that he flattered this white rock for some twinklings in the language which I did not understand at all. But as soon as he stopped to flatter the rock, the rest answered in a very low voice. After that, they started to salute one another in their own way or custom. They shook hands together, laughed to one another. As soon as they were shareful to one another like that, they went back to their seats. But to my surprise, as soon as all of them were seated back in groups on top of the water, I saw that all kinds of drinks were brought onto the large round tables which were before each of the groups, and also onto the large tables which were before the musicians.

Having drunk these very costly drinks for some twinklings, the musicians started to play a variety of music, and then the whole of these wealthy wild people jumped up and started to dance here and there with happiness. After a few twinklings, and as the orchestras changed the beating of their instruments to another warm and very lovely style, these wealthy wild people became mad at the same time. They did not know what they were doing immediately they started swinging to the rhythm. After a while they began to laugh greatly at intervals, and to run here and there with happiness as each of them held the drinking vessel by the left hand. As they were jumping here and there, it was so the coloured floodlights were flashing and following them, and it was so they were bowing for this dazzling white rock at intervals. As I saw them doing so, I understood now that the dazzling white rock was their god which they came to worship that night.

But as I still seriously kept watching them all the while, I heard unexpectedly the music of my own town playing together with many others. Although the music of all kinds of races was being played at the same time by the orchestras, I had not heard that of my own town before this time. As I still hesitated to listen to it very well, there I saw that the beatings of the instruments had changed. And then the whole of these wild wealthy people of the wild jungle danced back to their seats, and together with their orchestras and their wild servants they faced this dazzling white rock on top of which I was. But as the whole of them were preparing to climb the rock, I heard clearly at this time that some of my town’s lovely music was being played by the orchestras.

Now, I did not know when I began to dance to the rhythm at the same time with happiness. And without hesitation, as I was still dancing, I put the bags of my juju and food on my left shoulder. I put on my cap and I put my bow and arrows on my right shoulder as well. Then I held my heavy matchet with the right hand. As soon as I had done so as I was still dancing with happiness and laughter. I started to go to meet them on top of the water. But they too had left the stream and they were coming to the top of the white rock, still dancing with great happiness, laughter and with the drinking vessels in their right hands.

My second “mind” began to remind me again this very moment that I must not forget that I was going to the Witch-Herbalist who was going to help me to make my barren wife pregnant. And I began to explain to it as if it was a person: “Yes, I know, but I prefer to dance with these wild wealthy people of the wild jungle first.” Or, “I don’t mind if my barren wife remains barren rather than to miss this dance!” As I was still explaining to my second “mind” like that, I had descended from the top of this dazzling white rock to a half-part of it, still dancing. And the whole of the wild wealthy people, their wild orchestras and their wild servants had also ascended it to a half-part of it as they too were dancing. So without fear, I danced straight to the spot where the music of my town was playing.

But I was much surprised that as I was dancing, dashing here and there to the rhythm of the music of my town without fearing whether these wild people would kill me or harm me, they did not even look at me, though I was strange to them especially in the way that I was dressed. So without hesitation, as they were dancing along to the top of the white rock, I joined them and I continued to dance along with them to the top of it.

As soon as they had danced to the top of the rock, they stopped dancing and their wild orchestras suddenly stopped playing the music. But when I did not hear any music again, then I too stopped dancing. Now they had a good chance to look at me well. And when they discovered that I was not one of the wild people but one of the people of the town, the whole of them kept quiet. They fastened their eyes on me sternly and I too fastened my eyes on them without talking to them.

Having kept quiet and looked at me from feet to head with great surprise for more than five twinklings, their supreme leader jumped high up and then shouted greatly with a horrible kind of voice. This meant to the rest: “A native of a town has come to spy us! So if your hands catch him, kill him without mercy!” Then without hesitation and as the whole of them were then sulky, they started to sing the song of war of their own race. And as soon as they started to sing the song of war, they began to dance the dance of war, to my dismay this night. Within a few twinklings that they had started to dance and sing, the whole of them became mad unexpectedly, they mixed up and they were jumping here and there as if there was a great scuffle.

They became so wild now, like a wounded tiger, that they began to beat one another so severely that hundreds of them fell on top of the white rock helplessly, but the rest did not bother at all. But alas, I did not know at first that they were doing so because of me. I joined them, I began to dance here and there and I was singing their song of war like a mad man. Because the song and dance were so fascinating, there was not any of the living creatures who might hear this kind of song of war and see the dance who would refuse to join these wild wealthy people and to dance with them that night.

But as I had lost all my senses this night, and as my first “mind” began to deceive me repeatedly, telling me to continue to dance and sing with these wild people, it was so my second “mind” began to remind me that I should not forget at all that I was going to the Witch-Herbalist in respect of my wife who was barren. But it was a great mistake to me that the warning of my second “mind” did not enter into my ears at all except to continue to dance and sing along with these wild wealthy people. To my sorrow, my second “mind” hardly warned me like that and I did not obey its warning, when these wild wealthy people jumped on me unexpectedly. They began to beat me with sticks and drinking vessels which were in their hands, as they were pushing me here and there.

As they were still beating me and pushing me here and there mercilessly, they pushed me to that Abnormal Squatting Man of the Jungle, who nearly punished me to death and also paralysed every part of my body with the cold which he was blowing out from his big stomach a few days ago. I did not know that this cruel Squatting Man was among these wealthy people at all. He started to blow cold air onto the bodies of these wild people in order to cool their bodies so that they might regain their strength and then be able to beat me more severely. He saw me through the light of the multi-coloured floodlights. And as soon as he saw me, he stopped blowing the cold onto their bodies, and he faced me. As he could not beat me, he began to blow the cold onto my body as hastily as he could so that the cold might paralyse my body and then the whole of them might beat me to death at once.

But as I already knew that he was the Squatting Man who was punishing his victims to death with the cold of his stomach, I did not give him time this time before I hastily performed one of my juju which made me invisible and then took me away from them and put me down behind a mighty tree. This mighty tree was far away from them and it was in a corner. I saw them confused when they did not see me again. And my juju had hardly put me down under this mighty tree when I started to shoot at the Abnormal Squatting Man of the Jungle with my bow.

But, to my fear, as soon as one of the poisoned arrows was shot at his swelled-out belly, it burst. Then the cold air which forced its way out made a great fearful noise which shook the whole of that area, the wild wealthy people, etc. and me, so heavily that we fell down flatly unexpectedly for fear. Not only that, all the living creatures and trees of this wild jungle felt the strong cold which ran out from the large stomach of this cruel squatting man so much that they began to shiver with the cold for more than one hundred and twenty twinklings before they could control themselves. And I too, as a man who lived in the town, was almost paralysed with the cold for about one hundred and twenty twinklings before I could control my body with the help of my juju.

Furthermore, the cold paralysed also the whole of the wild wealthy people, their wild orchestras and their wild servants so much that they did not know when they fell down flatly on top of this white rock for about one hundred and twenty twinklings before they could stand up. So all of them scattered with great fear into different parts of this wild jungle as soon as they stood up. After a while, this cruel Abnormal Squatting Man crawled away with great pain when all his efforts to trace me out and revenge on me had failed. It was like that I revenged on this Squatting Man who had punished me nearly to death some time ago with the cold of his stomach. But fear did not let me continue my journey immediately, and I remained at the foot of this mighty tree till daybreak.





The Strange Round Shadow




It was hardly daybreak when my second “mind” advised me to continue my journey at the same time and not to wait for one more twinkling at the foot of the mighty tree, otherwise the cruel Squatting Man would trace me out very soon and punish me to death at last. “Furthermore, I hint you now that this Cruel Squatting Man will meet you in a court of law and there you will be sentenced to death very soon for harming him,” thus my second “mind” hinted me.

So as this my second “mind” always told the truth, therefore I followed its advice. Then I continued my journey at the same time without eating anything this morning. But I was not happy at all once my second “mind” had hinted me that I would be sentenced to death very soon for harming the Squatting Man of the Jungle. However, when I had travelled with fear till the eleventh hour of the morning, I left the wild jungle behind and I entered a wild savannah. Having travelled in this savannah till the first hour of the noon, I stopped on one big round cool shadow. My intention was not to stop there at all but just to continue my journey throughout that day, but I was forced to stop there by hunger.

Of course, I could not hesitate to look well at this strange round shadow and its surroundings, immediately I travelled to it in the hot sun. This thick shadow was so cool that one who sat on it would not like to leave there as soon as he wanted to, especially if it was in the dry season when the sun was very hot like fire.

After I had roasted one yam and eaten it, and as I sat at a little distance from the fire in which I roasted the yam, then I began to look at this strange thick round shadow and its surroundings very well. But I was afraid because I did not see any hill or mighty tree or anything which was near there and which could form this cool round shadow. Again, with fear, I raised my head to the sky. I began to think with confusion how a cool round thick shadow like this one was formed without an object.

As I was still wondering about this strange shadow which was formed without an object, there I saw unexpectedly that six strong ropes were descending from the sky very fast to the edge of this round shadow. Then, without hesitation, the six strong ropes hooked the round edge of this shadow. The gap between one rope and the other was so accurate that when all of the six ropes were drawing the shadow along to the sky, it was balanced.

Having seen this incident again, I hastily packed my belongings and then I was ready to go away from this strange shadow. But it was too late for me to do so. I could not do anything again to save myself from it, for the movement of it along to the sky was too fast.

Now, as I could not do anything else to save myself from it or to jump down to the ground, then I left myself to what might happen to me at the destination where the six ropes were drawing the strange shadow. As I sat in the centre of the shadow which had already been drawn to a great height in the sky, I looked at each of the six ropes very well, and I saw that each was real thick shadow as well. Having seen this again, a great sadness and depression covered both my “minds”. I was so discouraged at this time that I determined that if I could be free from this incident or destructive happenings, I would discontinue my journey to the town of the Witch-Herbalist, but I would return immediately to my town. I thought to do so with fear and embarrassment, especially as sadness and depression had paralysed my first and second “minds” this time so much that both could not talk to me or to advise me as usual.

So as my first “mind” and second “mind” could not tell me what to do to save myself from this fast-moving strange shadow at this time, I began to think of another way to remove the sadness and depression from my “memory”. After a while, as this thick shadow was still taking me to a greater height in the sky, it came to my “memory” unexpectedly to use one of my juju which had the power to make me disappear suddenly. So without hesitation, I used this juju. But I was greatly shocked that when I used it, it had no effect at all. And it was later on I understood that it could not help if my bare feet were not on the ground.

Now as my juju had failed to render help, I shot several poisonous arrows at the shadow. But all was in vain. The arrows could not stop it from moving along. At last, when all my efforts to free myself from this shadow had failed, it came to my “memory” to start to sing and dance as if I was not in trouble of this sort. Then as soon as this thought came to my “memory”, I remembered a kind of deprecation with which we begged the “god of the state” of my town whenever we needed something from it. Then I changed this deprecation to a long song at once.

So I began to sing this song with a clear voice as I began to dance cheerfully. After a while, my first and second “minds” which were my partners and advisers regained their powers. They were no more sad or depressed. But as I was still singing and dancing, I saw that the six ropes started to draw the thick shadow across the sky instead of continuing to draw it vertically. When this shadow had moved fast across the sky for about sixty twinklings, I saw a mountain in front, far away. After a while the shadow began to move toward the top of the mountain. However, I continued to sing and dance cheerfully.

As I was still doing that, there I saw unexpectedly about forty children on this strange shadow. All of them stood before me and when I looked at each of them, they were between eight and ten years of age. Only a few of them were females. Each of them was dressed in multi-coloured garments of their own race or native type or style. The garments ran from their necks down to the ankles with long sleeves which ran from the elbows to the wrists. The stars, sun and moon which were printed on their garments were shining brightly together with the blades of grasses and the leaves of all the kinds of trees which were in this wild savannah. But of course, some of them looked older than their age.

The colour of their skins and of their heads was the same as the colour of this savannah. Therefore, it was very difficult to find them out or to see them when they stood on the ground of the wild savannah.

Their mouths were as moderate as those of the wild people of the wild jungle, and it was so for their ears. But their eyelids and eyeballs were swelled out with a very lovely shape. They had normal length of arms and palms. But, to my fear, I never knew where they came from nor did I see them when they walked or flew to the round shadow. So with fear I stopped singing and dancing immediately I saw them in front of me on this shadow. I was still looking at every one of them with surprise and fear, and all of them too were looking at me without talking to me or to one another for a few twinklings. Then one of them walked closely to me and he began to ask questions from me unexpectedly thus: “Who are you? Are you a native of a town?” I answered him: “I am a man from a town and I was a brave hunter of wild animals. I was brave enough that I had fought and conquered many wild people, and even the savage Squatting Man of the Jungle.”

Again he asked me, as the rest were looking at me sternly: “Where is your town?” I replied: “My town is far away from here.” Further, he asked: “Could you tell us a brief history of your people?” I answered: “Yes, the whole people of my town are heathens. Even my father is the chief priest of idol, god, etc. worshippers. He conducts all worshipping ceremonies. And as for myself, I am a ‘born and die baby’. But I could not return to my folks again since my mother bore me last. As my father is a strong juju man, he had tied me down with juju and by that I could not return to my folks again. But of course, I am eager to return to them sometime.” Furthermore and with much interest, he asked me: “All right, where are you going to now?” I replied: “I am going to the Witch-Herbalist whose Remote Town is far away from my town.” “What are you going to see the Witch-Herbalist for?” he asked with wonder. And I explained to him: “Yes, I am going to see her in respect of my wife who has been barren since when I married her. And I want the Witch-Herbalist to help me to make her pregnant.”

When I explained to him like this, the whole of them nodded at the same time with surprise. Then the one who was asking the questions from me, asked again: “Do you know where this round thick shadow is taking us to now?” I replied: “I do not know!” Then he said: “Well, it is taking us to our mother who lives with us on the mountain!” As this one was still asking the questions from me, one who was next to him cut in and asked from me unexpectedly: “But do you know or have you heard of the ‘mother with long breasts’?” When I heard this fearful question, I shook my head heavily to left and right and I feared greatly before I replied: “I have never seen the ‘mother with long breasts’, but I had been hearing of her from the old people of my town for a long time before I started my journey.” But when all of them heard so from me, they shouted with one voice: “Is that so? Well, you are going to meet her today!”

“Will she be kind to me?” I asked from them with fear, especially when it came to my “memory” at this time that my second “mind” had hinted me that I would be sentenced to death sooner or later, for harming the Squatting Man of the Jungle. Then they replied: “Well, none of us can tell. Because she is kind sometimes and unkind sometimes. But of course, she hates especially to see the townspeople!”

When they explained to me like that and saw on my face the great fear which could not be expressed, they started to sing and dance round me at the same time. I still dropped my head down heavily in sorrow, as they were still dancing and singing loudly with a very cheerful voice. The thick shadow drove us to the top of the mountain when it was about the fourth hour of the evening. Then it stopped on top of the mountain and disappeared unexpectedly.

As I was still cast down at the spot on which this shadow dropped us, then these children became wild unexpectedly, and without hesitation they pulled my arms up and I stood up with fear. Then they began to drag me along to an unknown place. After a while they dragged me to a place where thousands of crevices of rock were scattered about. Creeping plants almost covered them and this made them seem like old huts which were built in the forests or jungles. Several hundreds of other children who were the same age as them rushed out from the crevices of the rock and invaded me as soon as they dragged me to this rough area. Then they started to beat me with the short sticks which every one of them held above his head. As they were beating me continuously with short sticks, it was so they were shouting greatly on me as if I were a thief. They were following their folks who did not bother to stop them from beating me. After a while, they too joined them to beat and shout on me as well.

As they dragged me further in these crevices of rocks, they were still beating me mercilessly with the sticks. So when I felt much pain, I clutched myself from those who were dragging me along. Then without hesitation, I began to beat them with my heavy matchet. But to my fear, as I began to beat them, their shouts were then even greater and those who were digging me along joined those who came from the crevices of rock. All were beating me even more bitterly than before as they were pushing me here and there in the rocks. As this time was too critical for me, I tried to transform myself into another form so that I might run away for my life. But my juju which could do so did not work this time, because I had not enough time to recite the incantation which could make it effective. Even I would not be happy to run away for them, but to satisfy my adventure.

When my juju failed, then I continued to use my matchet with all my power. Again, my matchet could not reduce their power at all. However, I continued to beat them repeatedly as they were then pushing me along zigzag in the scattered crevices of rock which were entirely covered with dead creeping plants. Having pushed me to a distance of about one-third of a kilometre, we came to a part of the rough path on which we were travelling. This part was very clean but was very curved. As soon as they pushed me to this curved part of the path, the strange thick shadow appeared again on the middle of the path. It had hardly appeared when I saw an old man, he sat on an armed chair and leaned his back on it. This armed chair was very huge and old. Then these children ran to him in the crevices of rock, they took him together with the old armed chair and then they put him on the middle of the strange shadow.

But I was very lucky that as soon as these savage children saw this old man, THE OLD MAN OF THE MOUNTAIN, they stopped beating me. Now the whole of them began to flatter him with their topmost voices as they were following the shadow along to the east of the top of this mountain as quickly as they could. When they stopped beating me and stopped dragging me, I too stopped beating them with my matchet. Now, I had sufficient time to look at this Old Man of the Mountain and his huge armed chair. He did not talk a single word to the savage children of the mountain, and he did not look at them at all, but he simply fastened his eyes on the path far away as though he was dead.

He did not even shake any part of his body and none of his eyebrows moved. The smoking pipe which was in his mouth did not produce smoke, although a big fire was in it. The type of this tobacco pipe was long to a distance of two metres. It was very thick and the tobacco holder on top of it was as big as a big bowl. He held the pipe with his left hand very stiffly as if the hand was already nailed there permanently. His beard was very fearful indeed. It was about one metre long and very bushy. It was spread on his breast and both shoulders instead of spreading forward. His moustache was long as well and spread to both sides of his upper lip. He had no hair on his head at all. So his beard, moustache and head showed that he was very old indeed. Furthermore, to my eyes, as one of the people of the town, it seemed that he was more than five hundred years old, because only bones were visible on every part of his body. I did not know whether he was the father of these savage children of the mountain, though they gave him much respect which was due to a good father.

But I was greatly surprised and afraid that, as these children of the mountain were giving such a great merriment and admiration to him, he did not show even a slight hint of happiness or make any motion of body to all that they were doing for him along the path. Yet they continued to perform this ceremony with all their power, so much so that they were sweating as if they were soaked in water.

After a while, I joined these children. I began to dance, sing, shout greatly with great joy, and dash here and there as they were doing. Then I began to feel hunger and I loosened my food-bag. I took one big roasted meat out. But to my surprise, it was at this moment that I first saw this old man make a very faint motion. Because as soon as I put the roasted meat in my mouth and twitched a bit of it with my teeth and started to shew it, now I saw the twinkling of his dried eyes. The twinkling was so weak that if one’s eyes were not sensitive they would not see it at all. And once he had made that faint twinkling, he did not make any again but remained motionless as usual. Now this showed me that he was still a living old man.

As I was still enjoying this meat, the children saw it in my hand and then they rushed to me. So we shared the rest of it. Although they did not allow me to satisfy my hunger with it, they were lenient to me from this time. As they had eaten from the meat, their joy was increased. They began to shout louder, sing louder and dance with more strength than ever; and then they were flattering the old father with their sweetest voices. But of course, I was doing as they were doing, along the path.





Long-Breasted Mother

of the Mountain




When it was about the sixth hour of the evening, we left the area of the crevices of the rock. We came to a certain part of the top of this mountain which belonged to the wild people of the wild jungle. Although this place was flat and was more than three kilometres in circumference, it was surrounded by the crevices of the rock which were entirely covered by creeping plants. In the middle of the crevices of rock, there was a very big town. But the way of construction of the houses in this town was very ugly and was quite different from that of the people of the towns.

Then, without hesitation, these children and I followed the thick shadow which was moving swiftly along in the town with the Old Man of the Mountain. After some twinklings, we passed through the town to the outskirts of it. On these outskirts, there was a large building which had a large entrance. Without stopping, the strange shadow moved into the premises of the mighty building with the Old Man, and we followed it. But there was a very large hall in the building and many small houses in those premises. So immediately we danced and sang in the premises. The children kept quiet at the same time and I did so as well.

Then this strange thick round shadow moved gently to where there were heavy blocks of stone which were in rows in the middle of the large hall of the mighty building. But as it moved again onto the top of one of the blocks of stone, then it disappeared. I saw now clearly that this Old Man of the Mountain was on his old huge armed chair on top of one of the blocks of stone. And as soon as he was put on top of the block by the shadow, it disappeared. The whole of these children bowed low and paid respect to him, and then they went to the other part of the premises. But to my surprise, this Old Man did not make any motion or sign of satisfaction of what the children had done for him.

But I did not follow the children to the premises. Instead, I stood at a little distance from this old man. Having fastened my eyes on him with surprise and fear for a few twinklings, I turned my eyes to this hall and its surroundings. So I saw that the walls of the mighty building in which the large hall was, were not mud but flat stones, and so also were those of the small houses which surrounded it. The roofs were very thick spider-webs, and the feathers of various kinds of big birds were stuck to them instead of thatching them with broad leaves or other kinds of materials. All of these feathers were of different colours. In this large hall, the blocks of stone in rows were the seats for these wild people of the wild mountain.

At last, as I stood before this Old Man of the Mountain, I saw everything which were there to my satisfaction. I turned my eyes back to this old man. But when I had fastened my eyes on him for about twenty twinklings without seeing any other living creature come to him, I feared to remain there for a long time. So I went to the other part of the premises of this mighty building and I met those savage children as they were eating ravenously, because they had been nearly dying of hunger. And without hesitation, I sat before them with the hope of eating from their food. But I had hardly put a bit of it in my mouth when I poured it out because it just tasted and smelled like cow-dung. This kind of food was not that of the people of the town.

Having finished with the food, these children went back to the old man in the hall and I followed them with an empty stomach. But to my fear, these children started to shout greatly and were flattering the Old Man. Then I heard heavy noises as if thousands of heavy stones were dragging along the ground towards that place. The noises were so heavy that the ground of the premises began to shake. As I began to look sternly here and there with extreme fear, just to see what was making the heavy fearful noises, there appeared from a big corner of the premises a very huge woman. She was coming with full force to the hall. These wild children ran and hid themselves in another corner of the premises immediately she appeared. But fear did not allow me to follow them to the hiding corner. I simply stood firmly before the Old Man with extreme fear.

To my fear again, when I fastened my eyes on this hideous stout wild woman, I saw that she had many breasts. Each was about sixty centimetres long and was thicker than a tube of thirty centimetres’ diameter. Though each was tapered as well, its nipple was more than ten centimetres in diameter. Each of her arms was very thick from the shoulder to the elbow and was about eighty centimetres in circumference. But the elbow was thinner than the shoulder and wrist. The muscle from each of the shoulders to each of the elbows was swelled out very high, and was as hard as a stone. From the neck to the waist was round and very huge. Her head was so big that it spread over her neck and shoulders. This head had an ugly shape like that of an image carved by an unskilled man.

The hair on her head was not visible at all because the head-cover which she wore almost covered the head. This head-cover was beautifully woven with white, red and green minute beads. Each of her thighs was round and very thick. The ankles were also very big in a strange way; and also the fingers on both feet were many, they were not ten altogether like those of a man of the town. Each of the thighs was so strong that it made her very strong and firm when she walked or stood or sat down, or when she gripped something. She wore a kind of material like a wrapper round her waist to the ankles. This wrapper was made with coloured beads. Each of the beads was as big as a grain of maize. This wrapper was very beautiful indeed. But she did not cover her breasts with anything because they were long and thick.

She wore very costly corals on both ankles and wrists, and many images of the antiquities which belonged to these wild jungles and wild savannah people were tied on every part of her wrapper of beads and on her head-cover of minute beads. But she was a merciless antagonist to all the townspeople and to all other wild people of the wild jungles who were not her race. In short, her stature and the whole of her appearance was very terrible for the eyes of the townspeople to see.

I stood half-dead so I could not run away with the wild children immediately this LONG-BREASTED MOTHER OF THE MOUNTAIN appeared. I saw her as she walked heavily and firmly to the part where the blocks of stone were in rows in this large hall. She walked to the block which was next to the one on which the old father of the mountain sat. She sat on that block and this meant she was next to him. But she did not attempt to greet him and the old father, too, did not greet her.

Having rested for a few twinklings, she directed her fearful eyes on me. Then she began to look at me from head to feet as though she was sulky, and she did not talk to me. Now, her horrible appearance forced me to lose all my senses, and I did not know what to do again at this moment. I feared so much that my first “mind” and second “mind” were completely paralysed with extreme fear immediately this wild mother appeared. Now, as my first and second “minds” were not able to advise me at this time, I was unable to decide within myself whether to run away for my life, or to shoot at this wild mother with my bow, then perhaps I might be saved.

It was like that she fastened her terrible eyes on me till about the eighth hour of the night. But at a few twinklings past the eighth hour, I saw more of these wild people of the mountain arriving in this hall and every one of them sat on each of the blocks of stone. But before the ninth hour, there were more than two hundred in this hall, they were both men and women.

It was then revealed to my “memory” that this hall was the court of law of the wild people of the mountain. So the wild Long-Breasted Mother was the judge and the Old Father of the Mountain was the chairman of this court. They came to judge some cases this night. And now it came to my “memory” that my second “mind” had foretold me some time ago that I would be sentenced to death sooner or later. But as soon as this came to my “memory”, my first and second “minds” could not help me, because both had become powerless and deserted me immediately the Long-Breasted Mother arrived in the court. So with the help of my “memory” I prepared myself ready to do any possible thing that could save me from these wild people. Again, as soon as I had planned what to do to save me from them, it came to my “memory” that the “strange round shadow” which brought me from the wild jungle to the mountain, was a trap with which the Long-Breasted Mother was catching the townspeople and the other wild people who had committed offences. This shadow was also used as their transport.

Then after a long case had been judged, my own offence was read to me: “The day previously, on the dazzling white rock, you wounded the Abnormal Squatting Man of the Jungle. And you, as a son of the people of the town, wilfully sat on the ‘Round Shadow’ which belongs only to the wild people of the mountain. And you would have stolen it away if it were not for the wild children of this mountain who diverted it to the top of this mountain. Therefore, you are guilty of stealing and you are also guilty of hurting the Abnormal Squatting Man with your poisoned arrow some time ago! Have you anything to say?” It was like that this merciless Long-Breasted Mother told me my offences, as she was very sulky.

When the two offences were read to me like that, I explained with bravery to the mother who was the judge: “Yes, I shot the Abnormal Squatting Man with my poisoned arrow because he wanted to kill me with the cold of his stomach and I must defend myself from this sort of danger!” And again, I explained with bravery to the mother, the judge, about the round shadow: “I do not agree that I am guilty of this offence at all, because I was travelling to the Remote Town of the Witch-Herbalist when I saw one thick shadow on the ground of the wild jungle. As the sun of that day was too hot, I sat on the thick shadow just to rest and then to eat my food there before continuing my journey. I did not know that it was not an ordinary shadow but a trap and transport for the wild people of this mountain. Unfortunately, I saw that the shadow began to move to the sky with me unexpectedly. It moved so fast that I was unable to come out from it. So for this, I am not guilty, and I am also not guilty for hurting the Abnormal Squatting Man!” It was like that I explained to the wild mother who was the judge. I defended myself with the help of my “memory”, as my first and second “minds” had deserted me for fear of the Long-Breasted Mother. But of course my “memory” used to record their behaviour, perhaps it was going to use it for a purpose when I returned from my journeys.

But when I explained to her like that, and especially when she heard from me that I was a townsman, she shifted her wild and fearful eyes from me and directed them wildly onto the old man of the mountain, who sat next to her. Then she pointed her left hand to me as she started to say thus: “You see, the Old Father,” the Old Father was the chairman of the court, “I wonder, there is none of the men of the towns who is agreed that he has made a mistake! You see this one now, the Old Father, he has not agreed that he had stolen the strange round thick shadow! All of the townspeople take themselves to be the wisest of all, either wild people of the wild jungles or other wild beings! You see now, in his statements, he said that he was going to the Witch-Herbalist’s town, the Remote Town which is as far as heaven from his town! Nobody knows why he is going to the Witch-Herbalist, though in his statements he said that his wife is barren! So this proves that the townspeople are never satisfied with what their creator has given to them, but they are wandering about both day and night seeking for the treasures which their creator has not given to them! They are stealing the wild people’s property! You see, the Old Father, the chairman of the court, this one has denied totally now that he had not stolen the thick shadow, which is our transport!”

Thus the judge or the Long-Breasted Mother of the Mountain, reminded the Old Father, who was chairman of the court, with great annoyance as she pointed her left hand to me. But I feared and was greatly surprised as soon as the wild mother with long breasts began to tell some of the behaviour of the townspeople to the Old Father. This Old Father began to become active or alive gradually. At first, he began to breathe in and out, then he began to wink faintly, again, he lifted his head up from his old and huge armed chair on which he had been seated since he was brought onto the block of stone by the thick shadow.

Later, as the allegations which the wild mother or judge was telling him about me and about the townspeople as a whole were going more deeply, it was so every part of the Old Father’s body became more alive and active. And towards the end of the allegations this Old Father, who was the chairman of the court, became alive and active completely, as if he had slept deeply and then woken up suddenly.

Then as soon as he had become alive and active completely, he stood up from the block of stone, he first shook away from his body all the dust which was on every part of it for a number of months. After that, he made a number of whiffs out of the long smoking pipe which was in his mouth for a number of months. After that, he stretched every member of his body thoroughly. Having done that, he walked firmly up and down in the large hall which was the court. After that, he shook hands with some members of the court with greetings and laughter, as if he had just returned from somewhere. Then he came back to his seat.

As soon as he sat down on his usual old and huge armed chair which was on top of the block of stone, he chatted with the Long-Breasted Mother and also with the president of the court who sat at the left. Then he returned his eyes to me and told me with a sharp voice, as he pointed one of his fingers to me: “Yes, all days are for thief to steal but one day is for the owner of the property to catch him!”

Then the Old Father continued to support the Mother or judge: “Yes, I believe all you have said about the townspeople. They are not satisfied with all the benefits which their creator had given them, but they are still wandering about both day and night in search of more treasures. Many of them who have attained contentments from their creator have left the contentments behind, but are seeking for uncontentments from one place to another throughout all their days! All those who are rich among them are forcing those who are poor to contribute the little they have to their own!

“Now, look at this poor one,” the Old Father and Mother turned their wild eyes to me and then the Old Father continued his controversy, “for example. He had left his parents, wife, friends, etc. behind in his town, but he has started to find about making a child for his barren wife. He said that he was going to the Witch-Herbalist to help him make his wife pregnant. He is not content with his barren wife. But now, as he is not content with what his creator has given to him, he is going to suffer death within a few twinklings from now, because he has already found uncontentments with his own hands. Yes, he must be sentenced to death now for stealing and for harming our Abnormal Squatting Man of the Jungle!”

It was like that both the Old Father and Long-Breasted Mother were contrary to everything which all the people of the towns were doing, both good and bad. Then both of them took their wild fearful eyes away from me. But just to hear more from me, the Mother with Long Breasts asked from me once more: “Yes, have you anything more to say before I give you necessary judgment for the offences which you have committed?” So, this time, the rest of the wild people including the Old Father, who was the chairman of the court, the president of the court, all of the court-bearers and the Mother herself, hesitated without talking to one another. All of them were waiting to hear from me.

So I told the Mother, the chairman and the president that I had many things to say. Then the whole of them roared: “What are you going to say, man of the town?” At the same time my second “mind” became active now suddenly and it advised me to defend myself in “the hunter’s dialects”, then perhaps these wild people of the mountain might understand my explanations more than before, and by that they might have mercy on me. Meanwhile I had prepared myself ready to fight them, just to prove that I was a brave hunter of wild animals and also to prove that the townspeople were more sensible than them.

However, as my second “mind” had advised me what to do, I started to defend myself in the “hunter’s dialects” thus: “But of course, a sensible man does not need so much advice. This is one of the townspeople’s deep languages!

“I have a very reasonable thing to do and that is why I have set my feet on my journey. Because if there is no reason, woman would have not been called ‘KUMOLU’.

“If there is nothing which has happened, woman would not have carried a dead person! I repeat it, advice is not useful for the wild people of the wild jungles. But the townspeople have understood all that is necessary to do, while the wild people who should have learnt from the people of the towns take themselves to be the wisest of all!

“But of course, there are two kinds of people on earth.

“One—The people of the towns are more sensible than tortoises.

“Two—The wild people of the jungles are as senseless as donkeys.

“This I must disclose to you loudly this night! And further, you take yourselves to be more sensible and wiser than the people of the towns, but alas! you are more sluggish than the donkeys! But of course, all of you would never admit this! I relate to the race of the people of the towns and you relate to the race of the ‘wild’ people! But there is a great difference between the ‘wild’ people and the ‘townspeople’. Yet, the difference cannot be joined together with wax! Alas! you don’t know this, but you simply hate the townspeople instead!

“Of course, one who has first fallen into a pit will teach one sense who is yet coming behind!

“I admit, I have fallen in your hands! Your thick round shadow, which is a trap for the townspeople, had caught me and brought me up to you. Therefore, this night, I am before you as an offender!

“The offence I did not commit. However, I am ready to accept whatever judgment you give me! Although the dog which will lose will not listen to its master’s whistle nor his call, I am prepared to retaliate to whatever punishment you give me this night! I am going to prove to you that the townspeople are wiser than you, the wild people of the wild jungles. I know well that the people of the towns are your enemies, but many of you will lose this night for you will not accept my explanations! But before you announce your judgment, I should like to see the Abnormal Squatting Man of the Jungle, just to ask some questions from him!”

It was like that I defended myself with the “hunter’s dialects” that night before the Long-Breasted Mother, who was the judge, the Old Father, who was the chairman of the court, and the president of the court. Fortunately, they agreed to go and bring the Abnormal Squatting Man of the Jungle, who had nearly punished me to death months ago.

To my greatest happiness, within a few twinklings, the usual strange thick round shadow brought him to the court. But as he was still chatting with the court members with great laughter and with his large belly which was touching the floor, my second “mind” became active suddenly and it hastily advised me to get ready to shoot my poisoned arrows at his belly as usual.

So he had hardly chatted with the Mother, Old Father, etc. when the Mother pointed her hand to me. She asked from him: “Did this man of the town hurt you with his arrow before?” Then he replied as soon as he saw me: “Certainly, he shot at my belly twice on different occasions and each of the shots nearly killed me before he escaped. I have even been looking about for him just to take revenge on him and put him to death at the same time!”

But the Abnormal Squatting Man had hardly confirmed this to the Mother and the others, when the Mother announced loudly that she sentenced me to death. As about forty court bearers were coming to hold me, I hastily shot at the belly of the Abnormal Squatting Man with my bow. The arrow had hardly hit his swelled out belly when it exploded greatly and then the usual extreme cold rushed out from it in so large a quantity that it was spread to every part of the hall and all over the mountain. And as he fell down powerlessly, all the members of the court and the rest of the wild people of this mountain scattered away when they could not remain in the cold which ran out from the stomach of this wonderful Abnormal Squatting Man.

Then without hesitation, I took to my heels. But when I ran helter-skelter to the gate of this court or mighty building, the iron gate was already shut. But I hastily climbed it and then I fell to the ground at the other side. So from there, I began to run along in the town helter-skelter as I was shivering with the cold. And the Long-Breasted Mother, the Old Father of the Mountain, and the other members of the court also scattered to every part of the town as they were shivering with the cold.

Indeed the whole wild people of the town, which was on top of the mountain, were also scattered and were running helter-skelter just to find a place to hide themselves from the extreme cold as they began to shiver with the cold. But I ran helter-skelter to one of the empty houses as I believed that these wild people would catch me before I left their town. I entered that house, and without hesitation I took two of the big garments which were hung on the rack. I wore them, and I put one of the huge caps which were also hung on the rack on my head. I did this so that they might not recognize me as a townsman but one of them.

Then as soon as I had done so, I came out from that house and I continued to run along in the town to the main gate of this town, as I was shaking from feet to head with the cold. After a while, I ran to the main gate, as I wanted to pass through there to the other side of the mountain. The gatekeeper suspected me of being the townsman. As he held me tightly and did not allow me to pass, the two garments fell down from my body and the cap also fell down. Now, he saw me well that I was not one of the wild people of the mountain. And without hesitation, as he was still shivering from feet to head with the severe cold which ran out from the stomach of the Abnormal Squatting Man, he blew the bugle to those who were near the gate. But before those people could rush me, I gave him a heavy knock on the forehead. As he fainted and fell down, I passed through this main gate to the other side of the mountain.

At the same time, I continued to run helter-skelter as fast as I could to the declivity of this mountain. But I had hardly descended half this mountain when thousands of these wild mountain people rushed to the edge of it. Without wasting a sixtieth of a twinkling, they began to push the heavy rocks at me without mercy, just to crush me to death. But as I was running down zigzag, the heavy rocks missed me each time they pushed them at me.

But as they were still doing so, it was so I was shooting at them with my bow, and many of them were wounded before I descended to the bottom of the mountain. It was like that I became free from these wild people of the mountain, the Long-Breasted Mother, Old Father of the Mountain, and the cruel Abnormal Squatting Man of the Jungle.





The Crazy Removable-Headed Wild Man




Having waited at the foot of that mountain till the sixth hour of the morning, my first “mind” advised me to continue my journey to a little distance from there before I should stop to find something to eat as breakfast. But when I had travelled for a distance of six kilometres, my second “mind” advised me to stop and I stopped near a tree. I put all my belongings down and I sat by them in order to rest for some twinklings. But as I was resting, it was so I was thinking of what to eat, because all my yams, roasted meat, etc. which I brought with me from my town had been exhausted.

Of course, as I was still thinking of what to eat, I did not attempt to go near the shadow of this tree, for I was not sure what kind of a shadow it was. Whether it too was a trap, like that of the wild people of the mountain, I could not say. Although I observed that it was the shadow of this big tree, I was afraid indeed to fall in the trap of another wild people of this new wild jungle.

When I had rested for about forty twinklings near this tree, my first “mind” advised me to stand up and walk from that tree to a distance of six hundred metres, and that I would find something edible to eat on a strange spot. I reluctantly obeyed this my first “mind” because it was misleading me sometimes, I did not rely on it so much like the second one which had never deceived me once. However, when I expected the second one to advise me at this moment, it did not respond or object to what the first one had advised me to do. So with reluctance I packed all my loads and then I started to walk in the direction of the six hundred metres which my first “mind” had advised me to take.

But to my surprise and fear, when there remained about twenty metres to reach the end of the six hundred metres, I saw one terrible wild man of this wild jungle at the very end of the six hundred metres. He was turning round continuously like a top. Immediately I saw this strange terrible wild man, I feared so much that I did not know when fear stopped me on one spot without my wish, with all my loads on both my shoulders, for the fear of this turning wild man had forced me to lose all my senses at the same time. I could not run away for my life, but instead, I began to tremble from feet to head. As I stopped and began to tremble with fear on that spot, to my wonder again, this turning wild man did not stop turning fast for a half-twinkling to look at me. When I had trembled like that for more than ten twinklings, my second “mind” reminded me: “But were you not a brave hunter of the wild beasts in your town, before you left there? Why should you then fear this Turning Wild Man like this? You should try to mend up your bravery now and act like a brave hunter!” Thus my second “mind” which never deceived me reminded me.

When my second “mind” reminded me this time like that, I first quarrelled with it, and I blamed it that it was too late to remind me just at this moment that I was a brave hunter of the wild beasts. It should have advised me before this time, and then I should not have followed the wrong advice of the first “mind” at all. But of course when I blamed my second “mind” angrily like that, then it explained to me that it simply wanted me to understand that the first “mind” was confusing me and that it was unreliable.

It was like this that I quarrelled with my second “mind”, but to my surprise both of us had hardly settled this misunderstanding when my fear vanished and then I regained my usual bravery. But my “memory” did not at all agree with this settlement. Instead, it recorded that it was an offence for the second “mind” not to advise me immediately of what to do, instead of waiting for the first “mind”, which it knew to be misleading. Again, my “memory” recorded as an offence the first “mind’s” desertion at this time, even if it could not help.

However, as my bravery had returned to me, I fastened both eyes on this Turning Wild Man or CRAZY REMOVABLE-HEADED WILD MAN. Now, I saw him plainly that he had two feet which were hardly to be seen by human eyes, because both were half-invisible under his body which was round just like a full-moon. His round body was so black that it darkened that spot on which he was turning round, on and on, very fast, as he stood upright. But if it had not been for the very bright sun of that day, I could have not seen him at all.

On top of this Crazy Removable-Headed Wild Man’s round body, there was a large, ugly and fearful head. This head was too terrible for the eyes of a human-being to see, and wait, because it was removable from the top of his round neck. Although his large head was removable, he was humming, talking, singing etc. with the mouth which went across it. He was also eating with it and spitting out from it, and breathing in and out steadily through the ugly nose which was on this ugly “removable head”. He heard words with the two ears which were temporarily attached to the extreme edges of the head. The two eyes on this head were large and fearful as well, but both were not accurately in front of his head and both were removable as well.

As he was turning round fast, he was humming so loudly that his humming noise was giving a headache to the several other kinds of wild people who were at a distance of two kilometres. But after several twinklings of watching him with fear and wonder, I saw one small hut which was at a little distance from the sparkling spot on which this Crazy Removable-Headed Wild Man was turning round steadily. In that hut I saw many animals roasting on the fire. As I was badly hungry at this time for food, I did not waste time but I ran straight to the hut with bravery. I had hardly bent down before the fire when I began to eat voraciously as my face twitched with terror, thinking that perhaps this Crazy Removable-Headed Wild Man might come to harm me.

But very soon, my thoughts became true, because as soon as he saw me in the hut, he turned round faster to the hut, and it was at this time that I knew this small hut was his own. To my fear again, he had hardly turned round faster into his hut when he pushed me onto the fire with his round body. As a brave hunter, I jumped out from the fire immediately. Of course, the fibre burnt some parts of my body, but this did not reduce my power at all.

I had hardly jumped out from the fire when he continued to push me back to it with his heavy belly. And to my fear, each time I struggled and stood up, before I could revenge on him, he would push me down again. It was like that he continued to push me down to the ground so heavily that within a few twinklings all parts of my body were nearly broken into pieces. I wondered that his “removable head” did not fall down from his neck as he was doing all this.

At last, when I believed that this Crazy Removable-Headed Wild Man would soon push me down to death, I used all my power and I resisted. So, this time when he pushed me, and then I pushed him with all my power, though I could not push him down to the ground he too was unable to push me down as before. He was too heavy for me to push him down to the ground.

It was like that both of us continued to push each other here and there in his hut until the roof of the hut fell on the fire and also on both of us. But we did not care to force our way out. After some sixtieths of a twinkling, the roof caught fire and it started to burn slowly for a few twinklings. Yet this wild man did not give me chance to run out of his hut, and of course I too did not want to leave or to come out from the fire until I could conquer him. But what gave me much fear was that as he was trying with all his power to push me down to the ground, which perhaps might result in death for me, he did not stop turning round fast, and so this showed me that he could not stand still.

As both of us were still pushing each other here and there in the hut which had caught fire, I saw hundreds of various kinds of large heads, arms, short legs, broad ears, wild eyes, round black bodies, etc. which were hung on the walls of his hut, and all were very horrible to see.

Both of us continued to fight fiercely, but he was unable to push me down and I too could not push him down even once, until the fire had become a big flame. Then as the fire had now risen high into the sky, neither of us could remain or continue our fight in it. Each of us started to struggle to come out from the fire, when his “removable head” mistakenly fell down. But as he was struggling to pick it up and then to replace it on his neck, I hastily picked it up before him. I ran out from the fire and, without hesitation, I began to run away as fast as I could with his “removable head”.

It was like that I conquered this Crazy Removable-Headed Wild Man, because he became powerless immediately his “removable head” fell down from his neck. So I continued my journey at the same time with his head on my hand, although I had hardly picked up the head when he forced his way through the big fire to the hut. Then he began to find another head from the walls as hastily as he could. But unfortunately he could not see as soon as his head had mistakenly fallen down from his neck, when we were fighting. So I had run far away before his hands could touch one from the walls. And as soon as he put one on his neck, of course this one was that of an ape. Now as he could see, he started to chase me along with the hope of killing me if he could catch me. But that was too late because I had gone far away from his hut.





The Town of the

“Born and Die Baby”




When I had travelled far away and was quite sure that I was entirely free from that Crazy Removable-Headed Wild Man of the wild jungle, I stopped near the cool shadow of a large rock. I put down the bag of my juju, my bag of food, and the “removable head” which I had snatched from the Crazy Removable-Headed Wild Man. After that, I held my heavy matchet, I went near there and I cut one slender stick, the length of which was two metres. I sharpened the top of it and then I came back to the spot where I put my loads. Then I pierced this “removable head” on it and then I fixed the stick on the ground upright in front of me. So the fearful wild eyes on this head faced the front, as if it was a living thing which was keeping watch of me from danger.

Having done this, and before I sat down to rest or to find something to eat, I stood in front of this head which was now a trophy for me. I thanked greatly my “Supreme Second” first for helping me to conquer the Crazy Removable-Headed Wild Man. And I thanked the “god of the state” of my town as well. This “god of the state” was one of the most powerful of gods of my town. So as from this day, I did not take this head as a mere frolic at all.

Having rested for some twinklings, then I stood up and, with my matchet in hand, I went around that rock to find an edible thing which I could eat. Within a few twinklings, I found a strange tree which had many big and fleshy edible fruits on its branches. These fruits were already ripe but I did not know the name of the tree, because the kind of such a tree as this one was not in my town.

I was badly hungry for food, because since I had escaped from the Wild People of the Mountain, I had not eaten anything till I fell into the hand of the Crazy Removable-Headed Wild Man. So I did not bother to know whether these fruits were edible, but I simply climbed the tree to the top and plucked many fruits down. As soon as I came down from it, I gathered them and then I returned to the spot on which I had put my loads. Then I began to eat them one by one with greediness.

These kind of fruits were not ordinary ones at all, because I could not stop eating them immediately one of them had touched my mouth. But I continued to eat them one by one until my stomach was swelled out like that of the Crazy Removable-Headed Wild Man. To my fear, immediately I swallowed the last one, my stomach was swelled out and it was so heavy at this time that I could not stand up or even shake my body slightly, and I could not even wink my eyes at all. I simply remained more or less dead on the hillock on which I had sat before I started to eat these strange fruits. Yet I was sure that there were no wild people or other cruel creatures who could harm me because I had used my protective juju.

To my fear again, within a half-twinkling, I became drowsy. But as soon as I was drowsy, I understood that this fruit-tree belonged to the “born and die babies”. It was forbidden for other people to eat its fruits. Though I was an ex-“born and die baby” I was no longer their member since my father had tied me down with a powerful juju. And the name of this fruit-tree was THE FRUIT-TREE OF GREAT ORDEAL. Again, a few twinklings later, I became dumb and dull together with my first “mind” and second “mind”. I was so dull at this time that I could not decide what to do again, but I remained on this hillock instead like a dead person. Now I had become a real droll for every living creature, wild people and even to myself. And it was not after more than five twinklings of becoming drowsy and a real droll, that I drooped my head and began to see:

“As I drooped my head drowsily, unexpectedly I saw that my breast down to the lowest part of my belly was parted to left and right as if it was cut with a sharp knife. Both parts were equal. My breast had hardly parted when I saw that I had become a baby, a baby just like a ‘born and die baby’. Then I stood up and walked from the parted breast onto the ground. As soon as I walked from the breast to the ground, I turned my face to my former body which was now lifeless. But when I had looked at it for some twinklings, I hastily turned my back to it as if it was a hated thing for me.

“I had hardly turned back on my lifeless body when I began to walk along in the clear moonlight until I came to the gate of a big town. This gate with its barrier was painted with white, red, blue and yellow paint. All were so neatly painted that they were attracting every living thing to touch them. So I had hardly stood behind this lovely gate when the keeper of it stood up and walked out gently from his booth. When he walked to the gate, he leaned his breast on top of the barrier. Then as soon as he did so, he pushed the beautiful flower which darkened the place to one side. So the ray of the clear moon shone onto the barrier.

“So through the moonlight he saw me and I saw him as well, he was corpulent and very tall. He was a light-skinned fellow, but his dresses were those of the ‘born and die babies’. As I was still looking at him with wonder, I was also thinking in my ‘memory’ what kind of man was this. The gatekeeper hissed greatly and then asked from me with the voice of that of a ‘born and die baby’, where I was going to. But to my fear, as soon as his voice came to my ears, my first ‘mind’ and second ‘mind’, which were my partners and advisers and which had deserted me since when I had eaten the fruits, became active at the same moment. My over-swelled belly became as normal as before and again I was free from drowsiness at the same time that he spoke to me. But my ‘memory’ recorded as an offence for my first ‘mind’ and second ‘mind’ that they deserted me as soon as I ate the strange fruits which made me drowsy.

“Now, I remembered that my former body from which I came out like a baby, was still sitting on the same hillock near the shadow of the tree.

“When the gatekeeper asked this question, I explained to him that it was quite a long time since I had left my town. Since then, I had been wandering about in the jungles, wild jungles, wild forest mountains, etc. in order to find the way or road to the Remote Town of the Witch-Herbalist. But, unfortunately, I could not yet find the right road to the town, till today when a strange thing had happened to me!

“But this gatekeeper hastily interrupted when he heard that ‘a strange thing had happened to me’. He asked: ‘What kind of “a strange thing” has happened to you today?’

“Then I explained to him how a few twinklings after I ate the fruits of a certain tree, I became so drowsy and heavy that I could not move any part of my body. But I was still in this state when I fell asleep. And as I drooped my head and as I was sleeping, I saw that it had really happened to me that from my breast to the lowest part of my abdomen was split or parted to left and right as if it were cut with a knife. After that I stood up like a baby and walked from my abdomen or stomach to the ground as if somebody walked from his room to the outside of his house!

“When I had explained to this gatekeeper like that, he shook his head up and down for some twinklings, so this made me understand that he understood what had happened to me. Then he explained to me that I would have not been able to come to the gate if I had not first left my mortal body behind. He explained further that he knew that I was an ex-‘born and die baby’ who had failed to return to them, and had belonged to the mortal people.

“Having explained to me like that, he opened the gate and told me to come in and I did so. Then both of us started to walk abreast along a wide, clean road to a big and beautiful town which I was looking at far away on top of a hill, surrounded by beautiful green trees.

“When we had walked abreast for some twinklings, and as both of us were discussing along the road, I asked from him where he was taking me to now. He replied that he was taking me to their king of the ‘born and die babies’, and also to see the wonderful inhabitants of the town. He said further that all of the inhabitants were ‘born and die babies’.

“Again, I asked from him what was the name of the town. He told me that the town was called the TOWN OF THE ‘BORN AND DIE BABY’. When he told me the name of the town, I told him that I lived in that town when I was a ‘born and die baby’. Even my house, children and my wife were still there. But I could not live with my children, wife and in my house again, because I had failed to return to the town as a ‘born and die baby’. And when this gatekeeper heard so from me, he shook his head with pity. Then he said that, as well as myself, thousands of the ‘born and die babies’ could not return to the town. He explained to me that the lives of the ‘born and die babies’ were just like those of soldiers. Of the many who were dead in the battle-field, many were fortunate to return to their towns.

“After a while, we trekked to the hill on top of which the town was. But as we began to ascend the hill, I noticed that all the beautiful trees which surrounded the town were blowing swiftly here and there as if they were happy to see me again.

“After a while we climbed this hill, on top of which the beautiful houses were built. As both of us were trekking along in the town, we came to my own house which I built when I was a ‘born and die baby’. Then I told the gatekeeper that this was my house, as I pointed my finger to it. He told me to let us enter the house just to see my people. But when we entered and my people saw me, they were not happy at all, because I had not been able to return to them as a ‘born and die baby’, and by that they took me to be a coward father. However, they gave cold water to me and also to the gatekeeper. After I had drunk it, they asked me why I had not returned since I had left them. When I told them the reason, they began to weep. Then the gatekeeper and I caressed them and preached to them until they stopped weeping.

“As soon as they stopped weeping, the gatekeeper, having seen that my people were not happy, told me that we should go to the palace of the king. And with tears, I left my people. After a while we trekked to the palace of the king of ‘born and die babies’. Then he took me direct to the king, who was on his throne at that time. But of course I knew the palace and every corner of the town when I was a ‘born and die baby’.

“Then the gatekeeper bowed low for the king, and after that for this who sat at the right and left of the king, and I did so as well. After that one of the king’s bearers brought one chair. He put it front of the king and I sat on it. As I sat, I was still expecting what the king was going to ask from me. The gatekeeper told the king that I was in difficulties and that was why he brought me to him. Having told him so, he bowed and then sat on a chair which was in front of the idols. He supported his jaw with left hand, expecting what the king was going to do for me. But as the king was very busy at this time, he could not attend to me as soon as I wanted him to. So I had much time to look at the surroundings of the throne. To my surprise, I saw that things had changed considerably since when I was living in that town as a ‘born and die baby’. I saw that there were several hundreds of images of the ‘born and die babies’ which half-circled the throne. All of these images were carved from superior gold. Each of these images represented the ‘born and die baby’ who failed to return to the town like himself. And I was greatly afraid when I saw my own image among these images.

“Some of them had long bushy beards. Many had none, but the glittering eyes and very costly dresses worn by them, this made each of them look like a living man.

“As soon as the king had finished what he was doing, he raised his head up. He asked from me unexpectedly, as he was sulky, ‘I believe, you were once one of the “born and die babies”.’ He asked me with great annoyance. So I replied at the same time with fear: ‘Yes, I was one of them but I was unable to return to this town again, because the father and mother who bore me at this time had tied me down with their very powerful juju. Although I tried several times to outwit the juju, all my efforts failed because the juju was too powerful!’

“‘Well, you have become mortal man then. So you are no longer useful to us!’ the king said, as he was very sulky. As soon as he said so, I could not speak but again but I simply shook my head up and down heavily. But when he saw that I did not say anything again, he pointed his hand to the image which was my own and then he said: ‘Look at yourself there. It is very shameful of you that you were not bold enough to return to your town! Shame!’

“Having said so with great annoyance, he dropped his head down. After a while he raised it up. Then he told one of his bearers to serve me with food, and I had hardly finished it to my entire satisfaction when he told another bearer to serve me with hot drinks. But as I was enjoying the drinks, the king told me that one cruel demon used to come out from his vault every year to take very expensive offerings from him, but if he failed to give them. There would be great famine in the town, and he would harm them severely if the offerings were not up to what he expected. The king expained to me further that the cruel demon would come out from his vault the day that I came there. Therefore, he wanted me to help them fight him, the king said. The king said further that if I could conquer him then they would be free from his punishment.

“When he told me so I agreed, because I remembered that I was a brave hunter before I left my town. But I understood that the king wanted to test my power as I had become mortal man, though in fact the demon was really punishing them.

“After some twinklings, the king stood up and his chiefs followed him. He waved his hand to me to stand up and I did so, and also his bearers. Then I travelled in the town with the king, etc., as the keg of the hot drink was in my hand. And as the king was in front and as soon as we followed him to the centre of the town, uncountable people rushed out from their houses just to see the king whom, perhaps, they had seen last more than one hundred years ago.

“As thousands of these ‘born and die people’ were beating drums and thousands were singing the melodious songs and dancing the dance of the ‘born and die babies’ in front and around the king and his subjects, it was so uncountable numbers of them were pushing one another here and there just to see their king. Again, as the king, his subjects, bearers and I went deeper in the town, it was so uncountable people were still rushing out from their houses. They were joining the others and all were dancing and singing cheerfully together. But as the whole people, the king, his subjects, his bearers and I were still going along in the town and as I continued to sip the hot drink, I began to notice every part of the town, and I saw that this town had changed enormously during the years that I had left there.

“After a while we left this very beautiful town and began to travel towards the west. As the road on which the whole of us were travelling along was very wide, so the dancers, singers and drummers did not stop but they continued their amusements. It was not long before the dust which the feet of the dancers were blowing high into the sky did not allow the rest of us to see well, when we came to the vicinity of another town.

“This town was very clean as well, but there were no trees. The cool breeze was blowing slowly over it, the breeze was cool in such a way that it was agreeable to every living creature. But in the centre of the vicinity of this town, there was a kind of gigantic vault. It was very strange to me because it seemed as if it was more than one thousand years old. Of course this kind of strange vault was not in the vicinity of this town during the time that I was living in the town of the ‘born and die baby’ as one of them.

“To my surprise and fear again great noises of multitudes of beings were heard clearly from inside the vault as if there was a big town inside it. But as soon as we travelled to this gigantic vault, the people who were beating the drums, and those who were dancing and singing did not go near it. Except for the king, his subjects, bearers and me, the rest of the people kept themselves far away although they surrounded the vault with fear. They stopped their amusements as well. So the whole of them kept quiet as they folded their arms. Then they began to look at the vault with fear. So this showed me that a strange thing was going to happen soon.

“In front of this vault there was a very long mound. It was lavishly decorated with golden flowers, ornamental bowls of gold, bronze, the emblems of this ‘born and die baby town’, and also with several kinds of shields and long spears of silver. The top of this mound, which was just like a roof for it, was covered with the dried skins of deers, antelopes, tigers, etc. The skin of a lion was spread on the ground on which the king rested his feet when he sat on the mound. His subjects sat on this mound as well on his left and right, while the bearers stood behind the mound. Then the king told me to sit on the ground in front of him. So I did as he told me to do, while the keg of the hot drink and the drinking vessel were in my hands.

“So all of us faced the vault which was at a distance of about two thousand centimetres. After a while, and as I was still sipping the hot drink, I saw that the uncountable people who surrounded the king and his subjects kept quiet unexpectedly, except for those flatterers who were still flattering the king with their topmost sharp voices.

“But to my fear, as I was still enjoying the hot drink, the king told me to get ready to fight the demon who was living inside the vault. He said further that he would soon come out from the vault. The king had hardly told me so when I saw that this gigantic vault, which had neither doors nor windows, split on the centre and parted to left and right. Then the dweller of this vault jumped out wildly through the split part. This wild demon had hardly jumped out when he rushed furiously towards the king and his subjects. He stopped at a short distance from them. But as the whole people shrank up with horror, the king and his subjects stood up for five twinklings, and after that they sat back on the mound.

“Then the whole of us remained calm and we were waiting to see how the wild demon was going to perform his magic, for this year, because he used to display different kinds of magic for the people each year that he appeared to them. But before he started to perform his magic, the king must first throw in front of him the thank-offerings of that year. He would not display his magic at all if the thank-offerings were below what he expected but he would jump on the people and tear many of them into pieces. Again, there would be great famine that year. As the king began to throw the thank-offerings to him. I hastily began to notice every part of his body which, at last, became a cause of great fear to me. Of course, I had already seen uncountable different kinds of underworld beings when I was a brave hunter in my town, and also since I had begun my journey, which still continued. But this kind of a demon, as I could call him, was extremely strange to me.

“For as I began to look at him this day, I believed that ‘one thing is bigger than another thing’. When I fastened my eyes on him well, I saw that he was taller than ten metres and very stout in a strange fearful way. His skin was as thick as that of an elephant. The skin was so filthy that uncountable flies and many other kinds of insects were perched on him, and uncountable numbers of them were flying round him. His spine was bigger than that of the other beings. His eyes were very wild and were as red as fire. In short, he was too horrible beyond description.

“I greatly feared when the king pushed me to the front of this demon. He told me to fight him. And this demon had hardly seen me in front of him when he jumped on me, but I was faster than him. He could not touch my body when I dodged to the right. So as he failed to grip me, which would give him resistance, instead, he simply fell down flatly, not knowing that if he fell down it would take him more than sixty twinklings before he could stand up. It was this day that the king and his people knew this.

“Then as he was still struggling to be on his feet again, I hastily sipped some of the drink which I had put near the king. After that, I went back to him. I pulled him up but he was hardly on his feet again when he dashed against me. He began to try to knock me to death. But I did not give him such a chance. Having failed to knock me down, he pushed me unexpectedly with all his power. So this time I fell down heavily and the whole of the ‘born and die people’ shouted on me at once. However, I had hardly fallen down when I sprang up with shame. Then I ran to the place where I had put my hot drink near the king. I drank some but some quantity still remained in my mouth. So without wasting a twinkling, I ran back to this demon. I held him this time and he too held me, and as I was trying to knock him down but could not, it was so he too was trying with all his power to knock me down but I did not give him chance to do so at all.

“Both of us wrestled for about forty twinklings and I could not win him and he too could not win me. Then as the whole ‘born and die people’, their king and his subjects, craned at both of us with great fear, I poured the hot drink which remained in my mouth onto his eyes unexpectedly. Now, as he could not see and also was confused, I pushed him down. Then I ran to the mound on which the king and his subjects sat. I took one of the spears and I beat the demon nearly to death with it. So this forced him to crawl into his vault without taking the thank-offerings which had been given to him. The people and their king were very happy when they saw that I had conquered this demon who was troubling them every year.

“Then the king, his subjects and the uncountable people of this town of ‘born and die baby’ danced back to the town with great joy. But as I was no more a ‘born and die baby’ like themselves, I told the king that I wanted to leave his town that day. So he and his subjects thanked me greatly for helping them destroy their enemy, the demon. Further the king remarked with happiness which could not be described: ‘Though you are an ex-“born and die baby” you have possessed the power which is far beyond that of the “born and die babies”!’ Having remarked like that the king, without hesitation, invited many people. He told them to lead me to the gate of the town and they did so. When they had led me to the gate, the gatekeeper bowed low for me and then he lifted the barrier and I passed through there to the other side of the road.

“Then as soon as I had left the gate, I began to walk zigzag along in the jungle. But I had not walked far when my first ‘mind’ and second ‘mind’, which had deserted me as soon as I started to fight with the demon, became active suddenly. But when they wished me good luck for winning the demon, my ‘memory’ angrily told them: ‘Where were the two of you when he was fighting the demon? I know, both of you deserted him, for you feared that the worst thing was going to happen to him! But of course, I have already recorded this pure offence for use after the journeys!’ It was like that my ‘memory’ accused my first ‘mind’ and second ‘mind’.

“So after a while, I reached the spot on which my mortal body still lay down on the same hillock. It was as fresh as ever. But to my greatest surprise, as soon as I came back to my mortal body, I saw clearly how this my body was split from the breast down to the lowest part of my stomach. Then as soon as it parted to left and right, I became as little as a day-old baby. Then without hesitation, I walked from the ground to my splitting stomach, and as soon as I lay down flat in the split as if one lay on the bed, the immortal body of the ‘born and die baby’ in which I was, disappeared unexpectedly. As soon as it disappeared, my stomach closed back. I became alive completely.

“But I had hardly become alive when I stood up from the hillock and began to look at myself with confusion, and also at my loads, matchet, bow and arrows and the ‘removable head’ which I snatched from the Removable-Headed Wild Man of the wild jungle before I travelled to the rock. But as soon as I was conscious then I understood that I could not go to the Town of the ‘Born and Die Baby’ without changing my mortal body to the immortal body of the ‘born and die baby’. And again, it was now I understood as well that it was not in a dream or vision at all that I was drowsy, dull, etc. when I ate these Fruit of Great Ordeal. But all these things really happened.”





The Offensive Wild People




So as soon as I was conscious, I put the bags of my juju and food, and my bow and arrows of poison, on my left shoulder. After that I held the “removable head” with my left hand and my heavy matchet with my right hand. Then I continued my journey to the Remote Town at the same time, without eating anything.

Just as a runner and as a walker, I was travelling on and on this day until the darkness of the night did not allow me to see my way in this jungle, although there was no road in this jungle. But at last, when I could not even see myself, willing or not, I stopped. Then I put all my loads down, and I fixed into the ground the stick on top of which the “removable head” was pierced. Having done this, with an empty stomach, I lay down flatly on the ground. Then as I faced the sky, I began to think of the difficulties, punishments, hardships etc. which I had encountered since I had left my town. But of course I was not discouraged at all. My strong wish which I had in mind before I left my town, was still fresh in my mind. And I was still determined to see that I meet the Witch-Herbalist of the Remote Town and beg her to make the medicine which could make my barren wife pregnant. But of course I believed that there were still punishments, etc. which I was going to meet ahead. It was like that I was thinking in my mind until I fell asleep unnoticed, without fear. For I had a strong belief that the “removable head” was so fearful that it could scare any wild man or ghost who might come to harm me in the night or when I was asleep.

But it was hardly daybreak when hunger woke me up, for I had not seen anything to eat since I left the Town of the “Born and Die Baby”. Then I stood up and I gathered my loads including the “removable head”. So I put the loads on my left shoulder and I held my heavy matchet with my right hand. After that I continued my journey in this quiet jungle with an empty stomach. I began to travel along zigzag in it, which was not easy for me at any moment, because both mighty trees and small ones and long wild sharp grasses and creeping plants with thorns on their leaves, were disturbing me. And it was so I began to look at the top of every one of the mighty trees, hoping perhaps I might see fruits on top of them to eat. But unfortunately there was nothing like fruits on top of them.

So it was with an empty stomach that I continued to travel along zigzag with much difficulty in this quiet jungle till midday. But I was lucky at last in that the very moment I became entirely tired and so weary that I could not travel along any more, I travelled to one part of this jungle where there was a big deep pond. It was full with clean water. The sun shone all over it from the sky because mighty trees were far away from there. And I was happy when I noticed that many kinds of small fruit-trees surrounded this pond.

Then without hesitation, I stopped under one of these small fruit-trees. I put all my loads down. Then with my heavy matchet in hand, I climbed one of these fruit-trees. I plucked many ripe fruits down. When I came down, I gathered them and I went back to the spot where I had put my loads, I began to eat the fruits one by one voraciously at the same time, for I was nearly killed by hunger.

Having eaten a number of these fruits I was satisfied, and then I rested for a while. I stood up like a strong man. I walked without fear to the pond and I drank from the clean water of it to my entire satisfaction. After that, I undressed myself, although my clothes were more or less rags by this time. Then I bathed in the cool fresh water of this pond for about sixty twinklings. After my bath, I dressed up again. But it was at this time that I noticed monkeys, apes, etc. were coming to drink and swim in this pond, and that they were the creatures or agents which had brought the fruits there before they germinated and became full-grown fruit-trees. Having understood now how these fruit-trees came there, I went back to my loads.

When I had rested again for some twinklings, I went to another kind of the fruit-tree. I climbed it and I plucked plenty of the ripe ones down. When I came down, I put them in my bag of food and then I packed the rest of my loads. I continued my journey at the same time. But as that time was nearly the sixth hour of the evening, I could not travel very far before the darkness did not allow me to see again. So I stopped and then I climbed one vast rock to the top. So I slept on it till daybreak, although I was nearly killed by cold in the night.

In the morning, when the cold was too much for me to bear, and I could not even stand up and continue my usual journey, then I forced myself to stand up. I gathered some dried refuse together with which I made a big fire. So as I began to warm my body with the fire, I began to eat from the fruits which I had put in my bag of food before I left the pond the other day. But as soon as I had satisfied my hunger and warmed my body to my satisfaction as well, I stood up, I packed my loads and then I continued my journey. Although I was in difficulties always, I was not discouraged at all. All my efforts were just to reach the Remote Town of the Witch-Herbalist at all costs.

But to my surprise and fear, I had hardly travelled in this quiet jungle for about six kilometres from the rock on which I slept, when I began to see a sort of the wild people of this quiet jungle. They were really offensive wild people indeed, because parts of their bodies such as arms, legs, thighs, heads, eyes, noses, etc. were very badly stigmatized by their creator. These sort of wild people were terribly strange and very offensive to the sight of the people of the towns. The noses of many of them were about fifteen centimetres long and curved at the end like the beak of a parrot. Hundreds of them had fearful goitres on their necks. These fearful goitres were not like those of the townspeople, because each was so large and heavy that it fell on each one’s breast, and so it was making a terrible noise when he was walking somewhere. Moreover, the sort of terrible noise which this sort of goitre was making was so terrible that both animals and birds were fleeing far away to safe places as soon as they heard it. Also, the offensive smells of the rotten big sores of their bodies filled up the whole of the jungle. And this caused this jungle to be quiet always, because there was not any other living creature which could live with these offensive wild people.

But as I hid in the buttress of a gigantic tree which was in this quiet jungle, I kept watching each of these strange offensive wild people with fear. Each of them was then walking from one place to another without talking to one another, except for the strange and fearful noises that which their bodies were making. Many of them saw me in the buttress of the tree in which I had hid myself with fear. So immediately they saw me there they hastily turned their heads towards the buttress. They were coming to me with great anger as fast as they could, when they saw the “removable head” which was on top of the stick and which I held above my head, with the hope that it might save me from them.

As soon as I saw that they were coming with great anger to kill me and then take the head from me, I hastily jumped out from the buttress of the tree. Then I started to run away for my life. But they too started to chase me along to catch me at the same time. But it was not so long before I became tired, so tired that I hardly lifted up my feet from the ground at this moment. But these offensive wild people were not tired at all. Now I was sure that if they could catch me they would kill me instantly.

But it came to my “memory” at this time that I was a brave hunter of the wild animals before I left my town years ago. Then without hesitation I stopped on a clean spot, with my heavy matchet which I held above my head. But my first “mind” and second “mind” could not advise me at this time, although my “memory” hastily recorded it down as an offence for them. So I used my “memory” instead, and I stood on that spot ready to fight them with all my power. And as soon as I had become as wild as a mad man, they surrounded me. But as they surrounded me and as they were preparing to invade me, I did not give them a chance to do so. I began to cut them with my matchet continuously as I was turning round the circle more than a hundred times in a twinkling. When they saw that I was more wild than them this time, and that they were unable to touch or approach me, they kept quiet and then they began to watch my hostile actions.

But to my horror this morning, these wonderful strange offensive wild people showed me that their powers were beyond those of the townspeople. So as I was still fighting them with my matchet, they started to move back a bit. Some of them hastily made a heap of the dried refuse and sticks round that circle, and then they lighted them up with fire unexpectedly. And within five-sixtieths of a twinkling, the fire had become a big flame which rose high to the sky. Then they extended their circle so that the fire might not burn them. They did this with the hope of burning me to death.

When they had surrounded the fire, they were then looking at me with the hope that I would be burnt to death soon. For as soon as they had put fire round the spot on which I stood, I could not cut them with my matchet again. My first “mind” and second “mind” had already deserted me, therefore I had no advisers. But there came to my “memory”, as soon as the flame of the fire began to touch my body slightly, one of my juju incantations. So with the help of this juju-incantation, I showed these offensive wild people that though they had power, the people of the towns were wiser than them.

Then without wasting a twinkling, I began to recite this juju-incantation continuously and loudly to their hearing. This kind of juju-incantation was to quench fire and also to make someone powerless. But when I read this juju-incantation for a few twinklings, it quenched the fire, and again, it made these wild people powerless at the same time. Then with my loads and bow and arrows and the “removable head” I walked from that spot to the circle of these people. And as they fastened their wild eyes on me, I passed through their circle and then I continued to go along in their quiet wild jungle.

But to my surprise and fear, as soon as I continued to go, I had not travelled more than one thousand metres when they regained their powers. As soon as they had regained their powers, one of the oldest of them, who was as strong as a stone, with a very heavy goitre on his neck, jumped high up and then shouted horribly three times. Having done so, he pronounced out an incentive song. So the whole of them became mad as soon as they began to sing that incentive song. And without hesitation, they began to dance madly round the circle for a few sixtieths of a twinkling. Having done so, they started to chase me to catch while they were still singing the song.

When I noticed that they were chasing me to catch me, I ran to one high hill with the hope of climbing it, and that by so doing I might be safe. But as soon as they saw me running to that hill, they hastily scattered in this jungle and they continued to chase me along fiercely as they were shouting horribly to one another: “Run to his right and catch him! Run to his left and catch him! Let the whole of us surround him and catch him!” It was like that these offensive wild people were chasing me along to catch me as fast as they could. As I was greatly confused when I heard that they planned to catch me, I hastily looked at my back, but to my horror again I saw that both the Abnormal Squatting Man of the Jungle and the Crazy Removable-Headed Wild Man were among them. But I saw that the “head of a rhinoceros” with one horn on its nose, was the Wild Man’s head this time. This head was more terrible than the one which I had snatched from him when I fought him years ago. So he too was among these offensive wild people, and he was turning round to my left and right as fast as he could to catch me, when he saw the head which I had snatched from him in my hand.

The Abnormal Squatting Man of the Jungle became extremely annoyed and wild when he saw me again this morning. He was jumping wildly to my left and right in order to catch me and then revenge on me with the usual cold of his large stomach. But when I took a glance at him, I saw his stomach which I shot with my arrow on the Dazzling White Rock years ago, that it was still plastered or bandaged.

When I saw these two cruel wild men among these offensive people, I decided immediately to run straight instead of climbing that hill. I was now running straight ahead with all my power so that I might leave them far behind and then hide myself in a safe place. But soon, I understood that my plan did not help at all, because after I had run as fast as I could for about sixteen twinklings, I saw that these wild people were at a distance of six metres behind me. But as I was still running along desperately at this time, I began to see in my view another high hill. It was higher than the first one which I had wanted to climb before I saw the two cruel Abnormal Squatting Man of the Jungle and the Crazy Removable-Headed Wild Man.

Then I began to run direct to this hill at the same moment with the hope of climbing it to the top and hiding myself there. Again, I thought in my “memory” that these wild people would not be able to climb such a vast and very high hill as this one. I hastily thought to do so with the help of my “memory” because my first and second “minds” had deserted me for fear. Of course, my “memory” recorded this down as an offence.

I did according to my plan. I began to run to this hill. But on both sides of the narrow path-like track on which I was running along desperately, I saw very deep ditches, one was on the right and the other was on the left side of the narrow path-like track. I saw these dangerous ditches which were at the foot of the hill about fifty metres below. Both ditches went along the path-like track to the hill. To my dismay again, I had already run to the middle of this path-like track and the ditches before I saw these two ditches on the left and right.

Now as I was in two dangers, the danger of the wild offensive people who were chasing me fiercely to catch and kill me, and the danger of the two ditches of the narrow path-like track, so I became entirely confused at this moment. I must not run back, for the offensive wild people would catch me easily, and further, I must not leave the path-like track to run in another direction, otherwise, I would certainly fall into one or other of the two deep ditches, which if I did, would be the end of my life. As I was still thinking in my “memory” of these two dangers with great confusion, these wild people were running nearer to me. So, willing or not, I put on more speed to run to the foot of the hill so that I might be able to climb it to the top and hide myself there before they came.

As I speeded up more than before, although I was totally tired, I reached the foot of the hill within a few twinklings. And without wasting a sixtieth of a twinkling, I clung to one thick creeping plant which crept from the top of the hill down to the foot or bottom of it. Then without waiting for a sixtieth of a twinkling, I began to climb the hill along to the top with the help of the creeping plant, as I was dangling to left and right with the bag of my juju, bag of food, bow and arrows, all of which were on my left shoulder, except for the “removable head” and my matchet which I held. But I was very careful with the bag of my juju because the cruse was also inside it. It was inside this cruse that the Witch-Herbalist was going to prepare the juju-medicine that which would make my barren wife become pregnant. I emphasize that I had been taking great care of this cruse since the day or year that I had left my Rocky Town, so that it might not break or crack, otherwise the Witch-Herbalist would send or turn me back for an unbroken one.

But I had hardly climbed this hill to one-third of its height when I saw that these wild people ran to the foot of it. They too clung to this same creeping plant and started to climb it up to the top of the hill as hastily as they could so that I might not be able to hide or run away from them. All of them, including the Crazy Removable-Headed Wild Man and the Abnormal Squatting Man of the Jungle, were dangling heavily to the left and right, and all were coming to the top of the hill. I put on more speed so that I might climb to the top before they could even climb a half of it, although it was at this moment that I observed this wonderful hill was exceedingly high. Its height was more than one kilometre and its circumference was about one-quarter of a kilometre and it was so wet that very cold water was dropping down to its foot from all over its body. But its top spread to one acre of land. It was full of bush, big trees and crevices of rock up there.

Luckily I had climbed this wonderful hill to the top when these wild men had climbed it to three-quarters of its height. But I had hardly climbed it to the top when I began to run here and there just to find a safe place in which to hide myself before they would climb it to the top. Unfortunately, I could not find such a safe place to hide, and I saw that they had nearly climbed it to the top. Having failed to find a place in which to hide because there was not sufficient time for me, I hastily went back to the extreme edge of the top of the hill. I sternly stood at the spot where there was the tap root of the creeping plant. But as soon as I lifted up my matchet to cut the root so that these wild men might fall down into the ditches which were at the foot of the hill, it came to my “memory” at this time that without the creeping plant, I would not be able to descend from the top to the foot of the hill. So I lowered my matchet with fear. Then I ran back to the crevices of the rock and again I began to find a safe place to hide.

As I continued to find a safe place to hide myself and I could not yet find it, it was so I was thinking in my “memory” of what to do to save myself from these savage wild people. So it came to my “memory” again at this moment that unless I fought with them bravely and with all my power they would overcome me. But as soon as this plan came to my “memory”, the wild people climbed the hill to the top. They had hardly climbed it to the top when they scattered to different places. Each began to hunt for me, as he had become now as wild as a wounded tiger. Having seen this their terrible action, I hastily put my bag of food and bag of juju down near a small rock and I hid the “removable head” under it. After, I put my bow and poisoned arrows on my shoulder in readiness, for perhaps I would need them unexpectedly. Then I held my heavy matchet tightly, and I ran to the one who was near me. I struck him on the forehead with my heavy matchet and he fell down and fainted at the same time. But as soon as I exposed myself to another one, and as this one was just preparing to jump on me, I dashed on him first. Then both of us started to wrestle. But within a few twinklings, I raised the whole of him off the ground and then I threw him into one of the ditches which were at the foot of the hill. And again, I pushed the first one who had fainted into one of the ditches as well.

As I began to jump here and there like a tiger, and with my eyes which began to flash fire at this moment, another two of them saw me and they rushed against me. But they could not do anything for me when I hastily put my matchet down, and then I held both of them. I twisted them together and then I pushed them into the ditches. But I had hardly conquered those two when the Crazy Removable-Headed Wild Man saw me. And as soon as he saw me, he began to turn round swiftly and was coming to me with the head of a rhinoceros on his neck at this time. But as he was still turning round swiftly and coming to me, I hastily picked up my matchet from the ground and then I ran to him. When the two of us met, he began to push me toward the edge of the top of the hill, with the hope of pushing me into one of the ditches. But as soon as he had pushed me near the edge with his belly, with all my power, I struck the head of the rhinoceros which was on his neck with my matchet. The head had hardly sprang away from his neck when I ran to it and picked it up with the left hand.

But the Crazy Removable-Headed Wild Man could not do anything to me or turn round now. He simply stood powerlessly on the same spot. And I had hardly picked up the head when the Abnormal Squatting Man of the Jungle saw me. But as soon as he shouted horribly on me, the rest who were still searching for me in the debris rushed out to him. But when they saw the head in my hand, every one of them hastily bent down to pick up a stone with which to throw at me to death at once. Having understood what they wanted to do, I hastily took my bow and poisoned arrows from my shoulder. I had hardly set it in action when I shot at the heavy swelled-out stomach of the Abnormal Squatting Man of the Jungle.

So as soon as his stomach exploded, the extreme cold air of the stomach rushed high up into the sky and to everywhere in that jungle. But when his stomach had exploded, the rest were so fearful that they did not know what to do again. But as soon as the sky had become cloudy and everything began to shiver heavily with the cold, and the rest began to shiver with the cold as the Abnormal Squatting Man continued to lament horribly for pain, I pushed the rest into the ditches unexpectedly. I did this successfully because they were confused and they could not see well at this time for the extreme cold had clouded the sky and this wild jungle as well. But as soon as I had conquered these wild people, I ran to the spot on which I hid my loads and the “removable heads”. Then having hung all my loads on my shoulders and held the two heads and my matchet, I clung to the same creeping plant and then I descended by the help of it.

But I had hardly come to the foot of this wonderful hill when I began to run along eastward in this jungle, as I was still shivering from feet to head with the cold of the stomach of this Abnormal Squatting Man of the Jungle who was still lamenting loudly in one of the two ditches with great pain.

I had hardly travelled one kilometre in this quiet jungle when I was forced to stop by the extreme cold. Then I hastily made a big fire. Having warmed my body for a few twinklings, I continued my journey at once without eating anything.

When I had travelled in this quiet jungle for about two hundred and twenty-four twinklings with much hardship, luckily, I came to a land, the climate of which was not tampered with by the cold of the stomach of the Abnormal Squatting Man of the Jungle. And there were plenty of edible things, such as yams, bananas, beans, garden eggs, pepper of all kinds, etc.

Then with happiness, I stopped. I put all my belongings under one big tree. As I still held the two heads with my left hand and my matchet with the right hand, I removed two big yams from the mounds with the matchet. Although I reluctantly removed the two yams, for I noticed well that the land belonged to the townspeople and not the wild people, but hunger forced me to do this. Then with the two yams, I returned to the spot on which I put the rest of my belongings. Having put the yams down, I pegged the two “removable heads” on the ground and then I made a big fire at a little distance from that spot. I roasted the yams and I ate them to my satisfaction. Then when I had rested for sixty twinklings, I packed up all my belongings and I continued my usual journey to the north-east of this land.

So it was like that I continued to travel on and on until night. But I stopped when the darkness did not allow me to see again. So I put my loads down and then I slept near the road till morning. As soon as I woke up and saw that nothing had happened to my property and myself, then I ate some fruits. After that I continued my journey without wasting time. But I was exceedingly happy when I travelled till midday and came to one road unexpectedly which belonged to the townspeople. So, this gave me assurance that I had not missed the right way to the Remote Town of the Witch-Herbalist and that I had more strength to travel faster than ever.





The Stalwart Gateman

and his Devil




When I had travelled faster and with great happiness for sixty twinklings, I began to hear the cocks crowing repeatedly from a distance which was not more than a half-kilometre. So this made me sure that I was near a big town which belonged to the townspeople. Then I continued my journey on this road as fast as I could in that direction.

But I wondered at last that, as I was travelling along on this road with happiness, my first “mind” and second “mind” which were my partners and advisers and which had deserted me since when I was in troubles with the offensive wild people, etc., began to congratulate me now for conquering the wild people, etc. But I hastily quarrelled with them for failing to advise me at the time that I was in difficulties. But as they wanted to apologize for their desertion, my “memory” hastily recorded it down as an offence for which they would be punished along with many others which they had already committed and which they were also going to commit again. However, at the same time, my second “mind” hinted me that I was going to meet a cruel stalwart gatekeeper on that road. It hinted me further that if I could fight him boldly, I would conquer him. “Though you may conquer him, his friend, the devil-worshipper like himself, will chase you to a shrine-field and there you will conquer that one as well!” Thus my second “mind” hinted me.

But I feared greatly when my second “mind” foretold me so, because it was not deceiving me at all, even though it might desert me sometimes when I was in danger.

However, as I continued to travel along, it was the fifth hour in the evening before I came to a townsgate unexpectedly, as my second “mind” had foretold me. Then I stopped at this gate immediately I came there, for there was nobody who was allowed to pass through the gate to the town without paying the gate-fee to the gateman first. So I had hardly stopped at the gate when the gateman rushed to the outside from his booth. But he was greatly sulky when he saw the two “removable heads” in my left hand and also my dreadful appearance, which was by this time too gruesome to the sight of a human. As he walked wildly to the gate, he hastily held up his long sword. But when I understood that he wanted to cut me to death with the long sword, I hastily ran back to a short distance from him just to avoid his sword.

Then as I stood wildly on one spot, I began to look at him sternly, and he too did the same thing. Now both of us fastened eyes at each other very sulkily and wildly and without talking to each other for about ten twinklings. So it was at this time I noticed his appearance which was too terrible to see. Indeed, he was the right cruel stalwart man that was chosen to keep watch on the gate, because he had no mercy at all. He was very strenuous in a strange way and he was bold enough to keep watch of such a stronghold as this townsgate. As he stood firmly on the ground he seemed like a stump of a tree. Each of his two arms was long and thick, many very thick veins were sprung out from every part of his body like the roots of a tree. He looked at every living creature as though that was nothing for him. There was no happiness on his face at all both in the day and night.

Then after about ten twinklings that we had been looking at each other, my eyes went unexpectedly to his booth, and there I saw one full figure or image of the devil which stood in front of the booth. The blood and oil which were pouring on it were dropping down and were full upon the ground as well. This image of the devil was hard mud. It was very horrible to see, and one small rock was in front of the image. This small rock was also wet with the blood and oil. So this showed me that this cruel gateman was a devil-worshipper.

But as we were still looking sternly at each other, he asked from me with a huge voice from where I was coming and where I was going to. I explained to him, as I still fastened my wild eyes on him, that I had left my town several years ago in order to find the way to the Remote Town; that instead, I had been in punishments of the wild people of the wild jungles since, until I had become a real straggler in the jungles, etc. which belonged to those merciless wild people who did not want to see the townsman but to punish him to death.

Again, this devil-worshipper, the gateman, asked me with another kind of a terrible shout what I was going to do in the Remote Town. But I explained to him wildly that I was going to the Witch-Mother, to beg her to make the juju-soup for me which would make my barren wife become pregnant. Having heard this from me, he raised his heavy head up and down heavily several times, and then he asked how I managed to get the two “removable heads” which were on top of the two short sticks that I held upright before him. But I told him proudly that I had fought fearlessly on different occasions with the Crazy Removable-Headed Wild Man of the Jungle, and that when I conquered him I snatched the heads from his neck and ran away for my life.

As soon as this gateman heard the story of how I came about the two heads, he shrank up with fear and wondered at the same time. After he had kept silence for some twinklings, he asked me again as he began to twinkle his large swelled-out eyes: “You were so bold, brave, strong and had such a powerful juju—all of which helped you to conquer the Crazy Removable-Headed Wild Man, and then you took two of his ‘removable heads’ from him! The Crazy Removable-Headed Wild Man of the wild jungle, who is so powerful that there is not any of the other ‘wild men’ of the wild jungles who could even go near! Ha! You are a wild man indeed, who people must respect! All right, put the heads in one of your bags and then come nearer to me!”

But after this strong and merciless gateman wondered greatly like that, willing or not, he became low-tempered and now he prepared to treat me with deceitful mercy. Then as soon as I saw that he had put his long sword on the ground, I took the heads away from the tops of the sticks and then I went near him with bravery.

I was now greatly confused, I did not understand whether it was my fearful appearance or the two “removable heads” that were fearful to every wild man or townsman that I met or met me, for whenever I met one or more wild men in the wild jungles they wanted to kill me and then take the heads away. But this time that I met the gateman, who was a townsman, he too wanted to kill me after he had forced me to hide them. So this was too strange to decide within myself correctly. I did not understand yet whether these heads were dangerous, harmful, helpful, etc., I was simply carrying them about with pride and if possible to carry them back to my town as trophies of my adventures.

Very soon, my first “mind” hastily told me that the heads were good and that they would help me in the near future if I could keep them safe. But again, the second “mind” hastily explained to me further that although the heads would be useful in future, the more I hid them the more dangers would come upon my head and the more I would miss the right road to the town of the Witch-Herbalist as well. Now, without reluctance, I strongly believed both my “minds” who were my partners in my journey.

Now as I went near this gateman, he asked for the gate-fee which was four copper coins, without paying which, I would not be allowed to pass to the Roadside Town. But I confessed to him at the same time that I had not even a single copper coin in hand at that time, because it was quite a long time since I had left my town. Having heard so from me, he paused for a while and then he told me to wait at the gate till daybreak. He told me further that he would think well in the midnight whether he would allow me to pass through the gate without paying the fee, because it meant death to him if some time he allowed one to pass free of charge.

So willing or not, I put all my loads down near the gate and I lay down. But before I fell asleep at this gate, I first asked from my partners, who were my first “mind” and second “mind” for about one hundred and twenty twinklings, what to do if the gateman refused me to pass through the gate, or if perhaps he insisted in the morning that he would not allow me to pass until I paid the gate-fee. But as I asked like that from my “minds”, after a while, my first “mind” advised me that as I had no money, it meant I must fight him fiercely before I could be able to pass. And again, my second “mind” added that unless I fought this gateman fiercely and with all my power and juju, I could not conquer him, and otherwise I would lose my life at the gate. My second “mind” explained further that even if I conquered him, his strong friend, who was a devil-worshipper like himself, would still follow me on the road to revenge on me. Therefore, I must get myself ready to face two fierce fights.

But when both my “minds” told me like that, I was so much afraid that my heart began to throb at the same time. Of course, as soon as my second “mind” reminded me of one juju which had the power to destroy such as this stalwart cruel gateman who was also a despot, my heart stopped throbbing. So I slept within a few sixtieths of a twinkling. But it was hardly sixty twinklings that I was enjoying the sleep, when my second “mind” woke me suddenly. Then it reminded me again that, although I had the juju which had the power to destroy such a merciless despot as this gatekeeper, he had a detrimental strange image of the devil which was moulded with strong and fine mud. This image of the devil had the power of attacking and avenging when one wanted to overpower its worshipper, the gateman or gatekeeper. But I could not sleep again for fear when I heard this from my second “mind”. And I was still in fear when my first “mind” hastily encouraged me. It said that I should not mind the second “mind”, but if I could fight fiercely with my juju and with all my power, I would certainly conquer the gateman, the despot.

Having heard so from my first “mind”, although it was misleading me sometimes, my heart became at rest and then I fell asleep again within a few twinklings. So I enjoyed the sleep till daybreak, and I was woken suddenly by the terrible shout of the gateman. And as I raised up my head with fear, I saw that people of the Roadside Town had started to pass through the gate to their farms and to the town, and so some of them were passing through the gate to their daily errands.

When I woke and stood up, I first stretched my body thoroughly. After that I loosened my juju-bag, I took out my powerful juju which had the power to destroy such as strong as this gateman. I wore it on my neck and it fell down heavily on my chest especially when I attached several other kinds to it. After that, I sharpened my heavy matchet very well on a big stone which was near the gate. Having done that, I put my juju-bag and a bag of food on my left shoulder and also my bow and arrows. Then I put the “removable heads” on top of the two sticks as usual. I held both upright with the left hand as well. After this, I held my heavy matchet tightly with the right hand. Having equipped myself throughly like that, I sprang up suddenly with bravery. I walked wildly down on this road then I walked back wildly.

To my surprise, as I was doing all this, this stalwart cruel gateman stood before his image of the devil, and he was repeating loudly a kind of an incantation which I did not understand, as he was perspiring continuously from head to feet. But he did not care to look at me as I had equipped myself with all these things.

But as soon as I had equipped myself like that, I did not waste a sixtieth of a twinkling, although I was sure that I could fight fiercely for more than sixty twinklings even if he could conquer me. So as he was still repeating the incantation loudly before the image of the devil, I ran to the barrier of the gate and I began to cross it. But immediately he saw what I was trying to do, he left his image of the devil. He ran to the gate and he stood firmly, like the stump of a mighty tree, with his long sword in hand.

Then as I was greatly sulky and without fear, I asked him whether he had made up his mind to allow me to pass through the gate without paying the gate-fee. But I had hardly landed my request when he shouted terribly at me that his image had told him in the midnight that he must not allow me to pass through the gate without paying the gate-fee. But he had hardly landed his unfavourable explanation when my first “mind” hastily advised me to jump over the barrier to the other side, where he stood, and then continue my journey to the Roadside Town.

Of course I first hesitated when my first “mind” advised me to do so. But I hastily thought it over again for a few sixtieths of a twinkling, how without reaching the Roadside Town, I would not be able to continue my journey direct to the Remote Town. And without forcing myself to cross the gate, this gateman would not allow me to pass. So I jumped over the high barrier to the other side. But I had hardly done so when he stretched his long sword high up with all his power to cut me in two. As he was just trying to do so, I too hastily stretched high up my heavy matchet to cut him in two as well.

At last, after both of us had fought for about fifteen twinklings, his sword could not cut me and my matchet could not cut him as well. Then I had hardly put all my loads down when we dashed against each other. Now, both of us began to wrestle with all our power. As he was trying to lift me up and knock me down and then cut my throat with his sword, it was so I was trying to lift the whole of him off the ground and knock him down and then cut his neck with my matchet. But all efforts of each of us failed to do so. As I was imploring my “Supreme Second” to help me knock him down, it was so I was reciting repeatedly and with a great shout the incantation of my juju: “To fall him down—to help me let his feet slip to the ground and fall down—to blindfold him—to force his eyes to close suddenly—so that I may be able to knock him down to death!” Thus I was imploring my juju and my “Supreme Second”. Meanwhile the gateman too was repeating the incantation of his image of the devil to help him: “Knock him down to death—to take all his power from him suddenly—to let him fall asleep suddenly—so that I may be able to conquer him right out!” It was like this that everyone of us implored his own supernatural power to help him until both of us began to perspire from head to feet. And within a few twinklings, we had scattered everything roughly on the ground. And as he was shouting greatly on me at intervals like a mad man and sometimes bursting into a horrible and cruel laughter, it was so I too was shouting horribly on him at intervals like a wolf, ape, etc. So our terrible shouts were filling up the air like thunder.

As the fight was still becoming more fierce, my first “mind” whispered to me at this moment to be moving along or toward one small rock with cunning. So without hesitation, I followed my first “mind’s” advice. I began to move with cunning toward one small rock. But when my feet were nearly touching it and as both of us were twisted tightly to each other at this moment, I bent to the left suddenly, and immediately I saw that he turned his back towards the small rock unnoticed. I shook the whole of him heavily and then I pushed him with all my power towards the small rock. As he was trying to stand firmly on the ground with the hope of pushing me down with all his power as well, his right foot fell on the rock instead. But as the small rock or stone was already entirely wet with the blood of the animals and the large quantity of oil which he had sacrificed to his image of the devil, the stone was made very slippery. Without hesitation, he fell onto his image of the devil heavily.

He fell so heavily on the image that the image itself fell on him, so heavily that it broke into several pieces for it was moulded with mud. But as he was still struggling angrily to stand up, I hastily snatched the long sword from his hand and then I threw it far away into the bush. Then I struck both his arms with my heavy matchet several times. When I was sure that he had become entirely powerless and that he would not be able to stand up to chase me for the next two hundred and forty twinklings, I took all my loads and without wasting a sixtieth of a twinkling, I took to my heels. It was like that I conquered this gateman, the despot and demoniac.





The Fight on the

Roadside Shrines




But when I had left the stalwart cruel gateman in agony and had run far away from the gate, I started to walk along on the road sluggishly, I was so tired and weary for I fought fiercely with all my strength with the gateman, it was hardly possible for me at this time to lift up and down my feet, it was also hardly possible for me to swing my arms. However, I kept going along to the Roadside Town from where I was continuing my journey direct to the Remote Town of the Witch-Herbalist, provided the king of the Roadside Town permitted me to pass through his domain.

When I had travelled sluggishly along on this wide road of the Roadside Town till sunset, I stopped under a tree which was on the roadside. But of course, the tree was at a little distance from the road. It had plenty of broad leaves on its branches, which were spread far away. Then I put all my loads down. I sat down on the ground and I leaned my back on the foot of the tree. Then I rested for about one hundred and twenty twinklings. Having taken the fresh air to my satisfaction, it came to my “memory” that if I kept on resting more than that the darkness would not allow me to find something to eat. So I stood up, and I began to walk along deeply into the bush with only my matchet in my hand.

Luckily, I had not walked far when I came to a farm where there were yams which were still in mounds. So I bent down and I dug four big ones out with the matchet. When I returned to the tree, I made fire and I roasted them in it at the same time. Having sliced them in the broad leaves, and as I was terribly hungry for food at this time, I ate the whole four at a time. There was no water for me to drink, but I did not bother so much about that because I believed that, in the morning, I would collect dews from the plants to quench my thirst.

Having satisfied my hunger, I lay down flatly at the foot of that tree but near my bag of juju, bag of food, and bow and arrows, and I used my heavy matchet like a pillow. But as I was too tired and weary, it did not take more than ten-sixtieths of a twinkling before I fell asleep. When I woke in the morning, I went to the same farm. I dug up four yams again and when I returned, I roasted them and I ate them immediately. Having collected sufficient dew and drunk it to my satisfaction, I continued my journey without wasting a twinkling, for the Roadside Town was still far away. It was about twenty kilometres from that tree. So I began to travel along on the road as fast as I wanted to, for I had gained my usual strength back by this time.

But as I was travelling along on that road as hastily as I could till about one-third of the day, and was very happy so that I felt no more tiredness and weariness, my second “mind” hinted me suddenly that I should look at my back and I would see that something terrible was chasing me to slay me for vengeance of the gateman whom I had fought with and wounded. Having heard like that from my second “mind” I hastily looked at my back with embarrassment. To my horror, there I saw at a long distance that a very tall and huge figure, who was just like a man, was coming hurriedly towards me with several strong and terrible followers. As all of them were still at a long distance, I could not see their appearances well, so I stopped and looked at them steadfastly.

But I suspected at the same time that the ugly, huge and tall figure was the comrade of the gateman. He and his strong followers were chasing me to kill or harm me. Having seen them like that, I hurriedly turned my face to the Roadside Town. I began to run along the road, so that perhaps I might reach a safe place to hide myself from them before they could overtake me. But as they were faster than me, I could not find a safe place when I began to see them more clearly.

So without hesitation, I took to my heels again, and I had not run very far when I came to the field where the shrines of gods of the people of the Roadside Town were built. Then with great fear, I branched to the field of shrines. And having run helter-skelter to the centre of it, there was a big clean circle, on which the people were celebrating their gods during the celebrating period or during the festival month. And many beautiful shrines surrounded the circle, each of which was painted, while the image of the god which was inside each was drawn on its walls, although most of the paint and most of the parts of the image were nearly washed off by the rains. Yet a person could know the kind of god which was inside each of the shrines.

So as soon as I ran helter-skelter with fear to this clean circle unexpectedly, I did not hesitate before I ran to the inside of one of the shrines which surrounded the circle. But to my dismay, I met the terrible image of the devil in this shrine instead. Great quantities of oil and blood of animals were poured all over its body and were flowing to the ground from its body. One big lifeless animal was hung on its neck. This image was exactly the figure of the devil and it was equipped with dangerous weapons like those of the devil himself.

Then willing or not I lay down flatly behind this image of the devil with fear, because if I ran out at that time to find another shelter, the comrade of the gateman and his strong followers who were chasing me to kill would see me. I did not know that he and his followers had seen me when I branched from the road to that field of the shrines. So he and his followers branched out as well to the field when they ran to that area, and then they began to find me immediately. But as they were searching one shrine and then another, my second “mind” started to remind me that in my own town, the devil was the most dreadful of all the other gods, idols, images, spirits of the rivers, etc. So if he and his followers saw me behind the adopted image of the devil, he would kill me and drink my blood instantly, because he and the gateman, his comrade, were strong and cruel devil-worshippers! It was like that my second “mind” reminded me.

Luckily, as I was still trembling for fear of the bad behaviour of the cruel devil-worshipper who was the comrade of the cruel gateman who was also a cruel devil-worshipper, this my same second “mind” hastily advised me: “You should get ready to fight with the man, the devil-worshipper, and his followers,” and that if I could fight with him as fiercely as I had fought with the strong gateman, his comrade, and as I had defeated him, it was so I should defeat the cruel man and his followers! But as soon as my second “mind” had advised me thus, my fear was dispelled and I became normal and very strong as well at the same time.

And when I became normal, I asked from my second “mind”: “But I thought there is only one devil on earth and his image was in my town. How could it then be seen as well in as far a land as this?” But my second “mind” explained to me: “The devil is a very strong spirit. He is an omnipresent spirit. Therefore, he is everywhere in the world. His spirit fills up the air always as the air fills up the sky!” But to my surprise, my second “mind” was still explaining to me like that when this huge, ugly tall devil-worshipper and his followers rushed into this shrine. And as he was sweating repeatedly and both his eyes were blazing, he saw the image of the devil which was his god, behind which I lay down flat all the while.

But as soon as he saw the large quantity of oil and blood of animals which were flowing down the head of the image, he ran there and he began to lick them as quickly as he could, as his followers stood in attention behind him. But as I lay down behind the image with fear, I noticed well that none of his followers tasted or touched the blood and oil at all. Of course I was not sure whether he would kill them if they licked or touched the blood and oil.

As he was still licking the blood and the oil greedily and was enjoying them to his entire satisfaction, I jumped up unexpectedly and I ran to the outside of the shrine suddenly. Then, without hesitation, I began to run here and there just to hide myself in another shrine so that perhaps I might be safe. Thus my second “mind” advised me to do and I must obey its advice. But I had hardly rushed to the outside of that shrine and begun to run along zigzag and helter-skelter when this hideous devil-worshipper hastily left the blood and oil, and then he and his followers, the raiders, rushed out of the shrine. All of them began to chase me here and there to catch and kill. Although his followers were running faster than him, they were unable to catch me as soon as he wanted them to, because I was then running from one shrine to another with all my full speed. He became so angry at this moment that he began to throw the heavy cudgel of iron in his hand at every one of them as he was following them.

And it was so he was grumbling and commanding them greatly to catch me and bring me to him. He was telling them as well that if they failed to catch me he would punish them to death in return. But unfortunately for him, though he was aiming at them accurately, his cudgel of iron, two-headed spear, etc. were missing them. None of these weapons hit them, simply because he was so profusely crazy with anger at this moment that he did not know what was right to do again.

Thus I continued to run zigzag on this shrine-field to save my life until my second “mind”, who was my real prompter, advised me hastily again, to run into one big shrine on the walls of which the image of the god of thunder was drawn. So without wasting any time, I ran into this shrine as my second “mind” had advised me to do. I hastily climbed the image of the god of thunder which I met there and I sat on its head, while I held its thunderbolt which it held with its right hand with my right hand, and I held firmly the heavy axe with my left hand which it held with its left hand. The image of the god of thunder was just like a giant. The length of the handle of the axe was more than two metres.

But it was not long before this hideous devil-worshipper and his raiders knew that I was hiding in that shrine. When they rushed in with full force and great anger, all of them were perspiring as if they were being beaten repeatedly by a heavy rain. They had hardly rushed in when their master, the devil-worshipper, who scowled and glanced at every part of the shrine, saw me on the head of the image. He and his followers surrounded me at the same time. But as he raised high up the long two-headed spear with greediness in the hope of striking me with it to death, the thunderbolt which was in the hand of the image of the god of thunder, hastily roared like a big gun.

And the whole of the shrine-field began to shake, the thick smoke which was very strange covered the field as well. This kind of thick smoke was black in a terrible way, so that none of the living creatures of that area nor I, as a living man, knew where to escape to. And as this strange smoke was covering the shrine-field continuously, the heavy and strong lightnings began to come down all over the field like a heavy rain with its strong breeze and noises. So within a few sixtieths of a twinkling, the eyes of every living creature were dim and the ears were deaf and also everything was disordered suddenly. So, willing or not, this hideous devil-worshipper and his raiders were forced to stop all their hostile actions by these horrible happenings.

The horrible happenings were still on when this image of the god of thunder, on the head of which I sat or crouched, began to shake as if it wanted to fall down. Having seen this, I jumped onto the floor suddenly, with the hope of running to the outside of the shrine and then running away for my life.

But to my fear, I had hardly jumped down when the hideous devil-worshipper and his followers heard my foot-noise. So without hesitation and mercy, all of them started to scramble to catch me, but all their efforts were in vain because the strange thick smoke did not allow them to see me.

However, as they had obstructed the entrance of the shrine and as I wanted to force my way out, I started to find another entrance. Unfortunately, as I was staggering about in the shrine which was entirely full up with the thick smoke, I dashed against the hideous devil-worshipper unexpectedly. As he wanted to grip me and tear me to death, I sprang back. And as he failed to grip me, he began to strike every part of the shrine while he was walking slowly here and there blindly, for he could not see the actual spot on which I hid. As he was still staggering here and there, he continued to strike every part of the shrine. And as the thunder was still roaring greatly and the lightnings were flashing down from the sky with thick black smoke continuously, he did not know when he mistakenly struck two of his followers to death with his heavy cudgel of iron.

As soon as he had mistakenly struck two of his followers to death, he mistakenly struck the image with the same cudgel of iron as well. But he had hardly struck it when the fire flashed out from it, and at the same time the roof of the shrine and other parts of it caught fire. And a few sixtieths of a twinkling later, the whole of the shrine began to flare. But when the shrine caught fire, the hideous devil-worshipper and his raiders had left the entrance to the other part of the shrine. I rushed to the outside. But when they heard my foot-noise, they too rushed to the outside of the shrine.

When he and his followers saw me faintly in the thick smoke, they began to chase me about on the shrine-field which was almost covered with the thick smoke. As I was still running here and there just to find a place in which to hide myself, it came to my “memory” at this moment to stop and fight with the hideous devil-worshipper and his raiders. Although they might overpower and kill me, I must show them first that I was a brave hunter of the wild beasts before I left my town years ago.

Then without hesitation, I stopped and I hastily pegged the two sticks on top of which the two “removable heads” were pierced, on the ground. And I put many juju on my neck at the same time. But I had hardly put my bag of juju, bag of food and bow and arrow on the ground as well, when I began to fight every one of them with my heavy matchet. They were trying to surround me but I did not give them a chance to do so, because I did not stand on one spot but I was jumping from one spot to another like a tiger.

As they watched my action and saw that it was more terrible than their own, his followers ran to his back. But as their master rushed against me, I started to cut him with my matchet and he too began to strike me with the cudgel of iron. Thus I continued to matchet him and he too continued to strike me with his cudgel continuously. Although there was still smoke all over the shrine-field, both of us fought fiercely like that for about fifteen twinklings. As I did not care to die this time, I rushed furiously against him. And as I raised up my matchet just to cut his forehead in two, he dodged to the left and thus he avoided my matchet. But as he threw his cudgel of iron at me, I hastily dodged to my right and it missed me. Again, without hesitation, I picked the cudgel up and before I threw it back at him, I put my matchet down. Then with all my power, I threw it back at him and it hit him on the head.

When he threw it at me for the second time I hastily bent to my right and it missed me. I hastily picked it up and I picked up my matchet as well. But instead of throwing it back at him, I ran against him and I started to beat him with it with all my power. Now he and his raiders started to beat me as well, with another kind of weapon, repeatedly. But when this hideous devil-worshipper saw that their beating did not reduce my power, he took his two-headed spear of the devil as quickly as possible. As he sighted me thoroughly and then threw it at me with greediness, I hastily lay flatly on the ground and it missed me. Then without wasting a twinkling, I hastily stood up, I picked it up, and I threw it back at him, but it missed him as well.

Again, he picked it up and he threw it back at me. But I dodged to the left and it missed me again. It was like that we were aiming at each other vainly until the thunder stopped roaring, the strange thick smoke disappeared, the lightnings stopped completely and the sky became as clear as necessary. And it was at this time that I understood by the help of my “memory” that it was the image of the god of thunder which caused all these horrible happenings, in order to save me from this hideous devil-worshipper. Of course, my mother was a strong worshipper of the god of thunder in my town.

After a while, as this devil-worshipper continued to throw his two-headed spear at me with great anger, and as I was throwing it back at him with anger as well, I did not know when his followers surrounded me unexpectedly. But as they were preparing to invade me, I hastily picked up their master’s cudgel of iron and the spear. So as soon as I threw the spear at their master, I began to beat every one of them immediately. Having seen this, the devil-worshipper or their master was so exceedingly annoyed at this time that he threw the spear back at me with all his power. But I was fortunate to snatch it when it nearly hit my forehead.

As soon as it came to my “memory” that this hideous devil-worshipper and his followers would defeat me in a few twinklings’ time, it wanted to help me. It had expected the help of my two “minds”, but both had been paralysed with fear. Luckily, my second “mind” became active suddenly. Then it hastily reminded me: “Please, use one of the thunderbolts which your mother gave to you for protecting yourself when you are in danger of this sort! Use it now!” Thus my second “mind” hastily reminded me. Although my first “mind” had entirely deserted me at this time, but my “memory” did not forget to record down its desertion as an offence.

However, my second “mind” had reminded me of the thunderbolts for I had forgotten everything in my juju-bag all the while. So instead of throwing the spear back at him, I hastily loosened my juju-bag and I took one out. But to my fear, when I threw it at this devil-worshipper, it fell heavily in front of him instead of hitting him or his followers. It roared greatly, so greatly that the whole of them fell down powerlessly. Having seen that they were so powerless that they could not even move any part of their bodies, I took all my loads and the two-headed spear of this hideous devil-worshipper, but I left the cudgel of iron there because it was too heavy for me.

So after I had thanked my “Supreme Second” greatly, I went back to the shrine of the image of the god of thunder. I knelt down before it with great respect. I thanked it for about ten twinklings. Although I had no kola-nuts, bitter kola-nuts, cocks, etc. to sacrifice to it, I noticed that it was pleased that I realized its help. Then I walked out from its shrine and I went back to the road of the Roadside Town. So it was like that I left the hideous devil-worshipper and his followers powerlessly on the shrine-field.





The Roadside Town




When I had travelled on this road which went to the Roadside Town for about sixty twinklings, I stopped at the roadside where there was a very cool shadow. I put all my loads down except the two “removable heads”. So before I sat down to rest, I took both away from the top of the sticks. I pierced each head of the two-headed spear which I had seized from the hideous devil-worshipper. Then I pegged it on the ground before my loads. Now I had got two trophies which, if possible, I would take to my town to show the people of the town how strong and brave I was. After that, I sat down before my loads at the roadside. I began to rest, because I was too tired from my fierce fight with the hideous devil-worshipper and his followers. Although I had defeated them at last and left them powerless, I did not know whether they had survived after I left the shrine-field.

Having rested for a while, I was eager to eat something. So I stood up, I held my matchet, and then I went a little distance in the nearby bush. Luckily, I had not walked so far from the road when I came to a banana-farm. But as this time was the dry season, so many of the bananas were already ripe. Without fear, I plucked as many as I required. Then I returned to the road with happiness. As soon as I sat down before my loads, I ate from the bananas to my satisfaction. Then I put the remaining ones in front of the “removable heads”. After that I lay flatly in front of the “removable heads” and the rest of my loads. But as soon as I began to think in my mind how the god of thunder had helped me to conquer the hideous devil-worshipper and his followers, I thought of the long period that I had left my town in respect of my barren wife. I did not know when I fell asleep unnoticed.

I enjoyed the sleep so much that it was the cries of various kinds of big birds which woke me in the morning. As soon as I was woken by the cries of birds, I stood up, I went to one nearby pond. I bathed thoroughly and I washed my mouth very clean as well. Then without hesitation, I put my bags and bow and arrows on my left shoulder as usual, I held upright the spear on top of which the two “removable heads” were pierced. Having done so, I took the rest of the bananas, and then I held my heavy matchet with my right hand. Then I kept going direct to the Roadside Town as I began to eat the bananas one by one.

Having eaten the whole of the bananas, and as I was travelling along on the road, I began to sing loudly with great joy I was so happy this morning that I travelled faster than ever. I did not feel to stop and rest or to eat till the twelfth hour of the day, when I began to see the Roadside Town faintly in front. Having travelled for about forty twinklings, I came to the town, and I entered there as I held the spear up high. I began to travel along in the town, just to see the king and ask him to give me permission to pass through his domain. The people began to run away whenever they met me and saw my horrible appearance.

Although many people were running away with fear whenever they met me, hundreds of dogs were following me and barking at me terribly, so this was a great fear and shame to me. But as I was still walking along in the town sluggishly without knowing where the palace was, the people did not wait for me so that I might ask them to lead me there. So after a while, I was puzzled, because the farther I went in this town, the more dogs were increased, and so their barks were increased greatly.

Then as the people and their dogs, goats, rams, etc. were running helter-skelter with great fear whenever they saw me, so I stopped going straight in the town but I began to walk heavily zigzag to another part of the town with great depression. After a while, I walked zigzag to one market which was full with people, because that day was the market-day. But as soon as the people in the market saw me, they feared as well, and then they left their wares and fled with fear and confusion to their houses.

When they fled away and left their wares in the market, and I was terribly hungry for food at this time, I simply walked sluggishly into one stall in which a variety of foods were sold. I sat down on one high stool. I leaned my matchet on that stool, my bags, bow and poisoned arrows were on my left shoulder and I held the spear and matchet with the left hand. I ate from the foods and drank the water to my satisfaction. Then as I was still chewing one long and big bone, my second “mind” advised me to stand up and walk toward the south of the town. But as I always obeyed my second “mind’s” advice, I stood up and then I kept going toward the south of the town as it advised me to do.

It was against the law to pass through a town without seeing the king and asking his permission to pass through his town or land or domain, and also without telling him the purpose of his travel or journey. Therefore, willing or not, I must see the king of this Roadside Town before I could pass through his town. So when I had travelled heavily and zigzag for about fifteen twinklings, my first “mind” advised me wrongly to travel to the north of the town. But my second “mind” hastily condemned its advice. It (my second “mind”) warned me strongly that I must not follow my first “mind’s” advice at all, because the palace of the king was not at that part of the town but at the south.

However, as both of them were still quarrelling with each other, and the second “mind” was accusing the first “mind” of being a liar, I followed the advice of the second “mind” and I still kept going sluggishly and zigzag toward the south of the town. Of course both “minds” had made up their quarrel after a few twinklings.

Luckily, when I had travelled zigzag in the town towards the south, I came to the palace of the king, who peeped through a large window when he heard the barks of hundreds of dogs, which had surrounded me and were barking at me terribly. But as I wanted to force my way through to the entrance of the palace, with the hope of meeting the king and asking him to give me permission to pass through his town to the road of the Remote Town, a number of the king’s bearers hastily shut the large door of the entrance. They had hardly done so when they went back to the king, and I heard when the king ordered them loudly that they must not allow me to enter the palace. Then he walked confusedly from that window back to his throne.

But as I stood all the while at a little distance from the entrance of the palace, I fixed upon the ground the long two-headed spear on top of which the two “removable heads” were pierced. Again, I put my juju-bag, food-bag and bow and arrows on the ground. Then I held my heavy matchet firmly, and as I was not allowed to enter the palace, I sat down close to my loads. But I was still chewing that long and big bone of meat which I took from the market greedily, it was so I was waiting for my “minds”, to hear their advice at this moment. Of course, after a few twinklings, my first “mind” advised me suddenly to stand up and break the large door of the entrance and then force my way into the palace.

But when I heard this wrong advice from my first “mind”, I hastily shook my head to left and right to show that its advice was risky to comply with. And at the same time, I continued to chew the big bone as if I were a mad man. Of course, my appearance was more or less of a habitual mad man at this time or before I came to this town.

However, as my first “mind” had misled me, my “memory” did not forget to record it down as an offence.

As I was still chewing the big bone voraciously, the large door of the entrance was opened suddenly. And as uncountable dogs were still surrounding me and barking at me terribly, about twenty giant-like bearers of this king, with clubs, matchets, thick ropes, thick chains and one large net in their hands, rushed out from the palace with full force. But as soon as I saw that they were coming to me to do something hostile, I hastily put my juju-bag, bag of food and bow and arrows on my left shoulder. Then as I held the spear with the left hand it was so I held my matchet with the right hand firmly, and then I stood up and I was ready for them to come to me.

To my surprise and fear, as I was still looking at these giant-like bearers sternly, I was not aware when two of them came to my back cautiously and spread that large thick net on my head which ran to my feet at the same time. Having done so unexpectedly, the rest rushed forward to me. They helped those two to twist the net all over my body. Then, without hesitation, the whole of them lifted the whole of me off the ground together with all my belongings. And without wasting time, they began to carry me along to the palace. Having seen this, I started to struggle to come out from the net and then to escape from their town, because I thought that they were going to kill me or harm me or sacrifice me to the king’s god or idol.

But as I was still struggling to come out from the net with all my power and as these giant-like bearers were now afraid of me, for they did not know whether I was a dangerous evil spirit or devil, they were unable to hold me with all their hands, I wanted to cut a part of the net and come out through the space, but they did not allow me to do so, and they began to drag the net along on the ground until they dragged it to the palace.

When they had dragged the net to the palace, they put it before the king who was seated on his throne with his subjects. And as they saw the two “removable heads” and the long two-headed spear on top of which I pierced the heads, they began to tremble with great fear, and they got ready to run away for their lives at the same time for they thought that I might be hostile to them. Then the bearers loosened the net away from my body. But they had hardly done so when I stood up suddenly with the spear of devil in my left hand and the two heads on top of it faced the king and his subjects as if both wanted to talk to them with great annoyance.

Again, as they saw as well the bag of juju, bag of food and bow and poisoned arrows on my left shoulder, and as I held my heavy matchet with the right hand, and as they saw my appearance which was fearful beyond description, I stood up suddenly with all these things. When they saw my hostile action the king and his subjects were so much afraid that they hastily ran to the extreme end of the palace, thinking that perhaps I might rush to them and kill them.

As the king and his subjects stood with fear at the end of the palace, and his giant-like bearers stood far away from me, the king turned his face to his subjects and said: “How could a man like this one (he pointed his finger at me) get these two ‘removable heads’ which belong to the Crazy Removable-Headed Wild Man of the wild jungle. And I am sure, there is no human being who could even go near him, how much more to get his strange heads. This is not a human being at all, he must be a spirit or some other kind of a cruel living creature. But again, I must take him as the spirit of the devil because he holds the two-headed long spear which belongs to the devil only! Who is he?” Thus the king said loudly with confusion. Then he and his subjects and bearers put their eyes on me again. They were looking at me steadfastly with confusion and fear. Although I stood firmly on one place, I was expecting them to do whatever they wanted to do to me. Of course they were not to be blamed as they called me the spirit or devil, for my appearance was exactly like that of the devil at this time.

As the king, his subjects and his strong bearers stood agile far away from me, hundreds of dogs were still barking with fear continuously in front and around the palace. There I saw that some of the strong bearers ran to my back, they held both my arms and neck unexpectedly. They tied both my arms together with a thick chain and they put also another big chain on my neck and then fastened it to the one which was tied to my arms. But they did this so suddenly that I was unable to take my juju from the bag to protect myself with it.

Having tied both my arms and neck, then they pushed me roughly to one big pillar which was in the centre of the palace. Then they tied the whole of me onto that pillar. Now, as the king and his subjects were sure that I could not use my power to harm them, they came nearer to me and they looked at me very well. Having looked at me for about ten twinklings, they turned to my back and looked at it from feet to head with much surprise and fear, but with much agility to run away if I were the devil who could harm or kill them. But as yet they were confused whether I were the devil or an evil spirit who had mistakenly wandered to their town, and they wanted to make perfectly sure of that. They started to examine the strange spear of the devil which I held and on top of which the two “removable heads” were pierced, and they examined the two heads with great fear as well. But they were so fearful that they did not touch the heads.

Having examined both spear and the heads for a while, they began to argue with one another with great fear and confusion. But after their arguments were clenched, then they confirmed that, indeed, I was the devil because the two-headed spear was that of the devil. But they were still confused as to how I managed to get the two “removable heads” because they believed that the Crazy Removable-Headed Wild Man of the wild jungle was so terrible that it was absolutely impossible for one to go near him and snatch his head from his neck.

It was like that the king, his subjects and his strong bearers mistook me for the devil who came to ruin them. When they were satisfied that I was the devil, then they walked to another part of the palace. They sat down on beautiful chairs and then they started to decide with one another what they could do to save themselves from me. Some of the subjects suggested that they kill me, but some reminded the other that the devil could not be killed for he was a strong spirit. And I was still in this affliction when one of the subjects told the king to stab me at heart, perhaps I might die. He reminded him further with emphasis that if they did not find one way or another to destroy me or render me useless, it was certain then that I would ruin them and their town.

But I was still in this great affliction when I heard that the king and the others agreed loudly to the suggestion. Of course that was before the king sent one of his strong bearers for his long dagger. I heard when he remarked, with fear and a trembling hoarse voice, to his subjects that since he was born, he had not heard or seen that the devil was murdered by a human being. Of course, his remarks were not accepted by his subjects. Instead, they insisted that he must try their suggestion first. Then he sent one of his bearers for his double-edged dagger.

But as soon as I heard what they were going to do to me, I began to think in my “memory” with fear of what to do to save myself from them. But alas, my first “mind” and second “mind” had already deserted me for fear at this time, so my “memory” had not yet told me what to do when that bearer returned with the dagger. Then he bowed low and gave it to the king. So as soon as the king took it from him, he held its handle of shining silver, and then as he stretched the dagger a little bit forward, he stood up. But as he was coming to me, his subjects and the bearers were following him at his back, slowly with fear as well. Luckily, as I had nearly died for fear of the dagger at this moment, my second “mind” which was entirely paralysed with fear all the while, became active now. And then it hastily reminded me: “Now, shake your body heavily to left and right and the chain which is tied to your arms will slacken. Then take one of the thunderbolts which your mother gave to you before you left your town and throw it on the floor of the palace!” Then without hesitation, when my second “mind” reminded me of this thing, I hastily shook my body heavily to left and right and indeed, the chain was slack at the same time. Then I took one of the thunderbolts from my juju-bag. So I hastily flattered the god of thunder loudly: “Oh, the god of thunder of my town! I pray thee and flatter thee! Please help me now to come out of this trouble! Please, help now!”

But I had hardly shouted to the god of thunder for help when the king and his subjects and strong bearers walked to the pillar to which I was tied. As they stood in front of me and were still wondering how the chain had loosened away from my arms, I threw the thunderbolt onto the floor of the palace unexpectedly. To my fear, the thunderbolt had hardly struck the floor when the echo roared so greatly on the sky at this moment that the roof of the palace was flung completely far away. Both walls and floor shook so heavily that the king, his subjects and bearers were flung to different parts of the palace and the dagger was also flung unexpectedly far away from the king.

All of them were trembling with great fear and were unable to stand up but were still unconscious, when several lightnings began to flash continuously into the whole of the palace. After a while, when these terrible happenings did not stop, all of the mighty pillars of the palace began to fall down and break into pieces at the same moment. But as the one to which I was tied fell down and broke into several pieces as well, I found my way out of the chain with which I was tied to it. As soon as I was free from the chain, and as the thunder continued to roar greatly and strong flashes were coming into the palace continuously and also to everywhere in the town, I ran to the king who was still lying flatly and confusedly together with his subjects and strong bearers. I told him to allow me to pass through his town to the road of the Remote Town.

So willing or not, and in this tumultuous moment, he permitted me to pass through his town to the road of the Remote Town against his wish. But to my surprise and fear again, as the lightnings were still flashing in from the sky and the echo was still roaring on the sky like cannons and thousands of dogs were still barking at the outside of the palace, the lightnings which were flashing into the palace ignited it suddenly, and within a few twinklings, the whole palace began to burn. So these lightnings, echo and thunder were so strong that the whole of the buildings, people, domestic animals, etc. were shaking and falling down as soon as the palace was blown down. And everything was disordered and in great confusion as soon as the big fire began to spread to all parts of the town.

But when it came to my “memory” that if I kept too long there, I would burn into ashes, I turned my back to the king and I started to find the way to go out of the palace which had already caught fire. But as I was still finding the way to go out, these stubborn bearers rushed to me unnoticed. They held me, but as they were preparing to beat me, I began to fight them fiercely, although there were big flames and thick smoke all over the palace. After a while, and when I saw that they were delaying me too long and that the fire was spreading rapidly, I began to beat them with my heavy matchet until they were tired. And then they began to find the way to go out because they were about to suffocate now from the thick smoke.

As soon as they had run away for their lives, I found my way and I ran to the outside of the ruined palace. And I had hardly come out when I started to leave this Roadside Town. It was like that I was saved from the wicked king, his merciless subjects, and his tyrannical bearers by the god of thunder. Then I thanked my second “mind” for advising me to use one of the thunderbolts which my mother gave me the day I left my town. My intention before I reached this Roadside Town was to stay with the king and rest for some days before continuing my journey, because I was too tired from the fights which I had had with the cruel gateman and his comrade, the devil-worshipper. But I was happy that at last the king permitted me by force to pass through his town to the Remote Town which belonged to the Witch-Herbalist. And I thanked also my “Supreme Second” as he was with me whenever I was in difficulties.





Road to the Remote Town




Now as I had left the Roadside Town behind me still ablaze, I travelled to the north-east with the two-headed spear of the devil, on top of which the two “removable heads” were pierced, with my juju-bag, my food-bag and also my bow and poisoned arrows on my left shoulder, while I held my heavy matchet with the right hand. The cruse was still in my juju-bag without breaking or cracking. It was in this cruse that the juju-soup which would make my barren wife pregnant would be put by the Witch-Herbalist who was the omnipotent of the Remote Town. Further, I thanked my “Supreme Second” greatly for guiding me in the Roadside Town.

And to my great joy, I had not travelled more than six kilometres from the Roadside Town when I came to the road which went direct to the Remote Town. But when I came to this road, I noticed that it was an unusual or a real marked road, because everything that I saw which went along on both roadsides were strange more than those which I had seen in my life. However, I stopped at the roadside, and after I had put my loads down, I bowed, I flattered the god of thunder and my “Supreme Second” for some twinklings for helping to free me from the troubles which I had encountered from the day that I had left my town. I praised my first “mind”, second “mind” and my “memory” as well for their help.

After that, I fixed the spear on the ground and I put the rest of my loads at the foot of it. Then I sat down before all. But after some sixtieths of a twinkling, I began to think of what I could eat, and it was so that I was looking with great wonder at the strange things which were on this road. I noticed as well that this road was very wide, clean with its fine white sand, and it was as straight as a ramrod. Different kinds of images, idols, etc. which resembled all kinds of living creatures all stood upright and went along on both banks of the road towards the Remote Town. The sacrifices which belonged to each of these images, idols, etc. were put before it. Some kinds of broad-leafed trees were also lined up along the banks of the road. Each shed a very cool shadow on the images, idols, etc. Although I did not know the name of these strange trees, their leaves and flowers were very lovely and attractive though the land seemed barren.

Several villages which were not far from one another went along the road but a little distance from there. This road was the main road for the inhabitants of the villages. So people were always seen going and coming on it. Their dresses and behaviour were quite different from those of my town. But what I noticed there as well was that I did not see any one of the people sit down or wait on either of the roadsides or banks. Again, I saw plainly that several people were coming continuously from the villages with the various kinds of sacrifices in their hands. When they had stood before the images, idols, etc. and prayed for some twinklings, then they put the sacrifices down before them and after that they went back to their respective villages. It was like that the people were rushing out from their villages to these idols, images, etc. to give them the sacrifices from morning till the late hour in the night.

I had fixed on the ground the two-headed spear which I took from the hideous devil-worshipper with whom I fought on the shrine-field before I reached the Roadside Town. And also I had put my juju-bag, food-bag, bow and arrows and my heavy matchet at the foot of the spear before I sat in front of all. As I was terribly eager to eat, but without seeing any edible thing to eat, I continued to look at the people who were going to and fro on this clean wide road.

But as soon as the people who were rushing from their villages to this road to give sacrifices to their idols, images, etc. saw the spear of the devil on top of which the two “removable heads” were pierced and also my bags, bow and poisoned arrows and matchet, all of which were at the foot of the spear, they ran to that spot with wonder and fear.

But when they saw all of these things clearly, and they saw me sitting down on the roadside in, front of all without talking, they thought that I was the devil, especially when they saw the long spear of the devil in front of me. They were also shocked when they raised their heads up and saw the two “removable heads” on top of it. So without hesitation, all of them bowed with fear before me. And after a few sixtieths of a twinkling, they began to pray. Having done that for some twinklings, they stood up upright and then they began to dance the dance of the devil round me as they were singing the song of the devil. Having done so for a while or till they were tired, they ran back to their respective villages. Sixty twinklings later, they came back with the sacrifices which belonged to the devil. They put all down before me. After that, they danced, sang and then flattered me as if I were the devil. They did this for about twenty twinklings and then they returned to their respective villages shouting loudly and joyfully, which showed that they were lucky that the devil had come to live on their land near their villages.

After they had gone away, and as I was terribly hungry for food, my second “mind” advised me to eat from the sacrifices. Having learnt this from my second “mind” I ate from it to my entire satisfaction without fear, although I was not the devil, as these people supposed me to be. Of course, I had hardly satisfied my hunger with the sacrifices when my second “mind” advised me again to stand up, to remove all my belongings and then to continue my journey at the same time. So without any argument, I obeyed my second “mind”. I hastily packed my belongings and then I kept going at the same time because I always followed its advice except that of the first “mind” which was too misleading.

But I wondered that the farther I went on this road the more I came to other kinds of images, idols, etc. which were even more strange. Having travelled till sunset, I stopped and slept at the roadside. At daybreak, I woke and continued my journey. But when I had travelled till noon without eating anything, hunger forced me to break my journey. So I sat on the roadside after I had arranged my terrible belongings as usual. Then with hunger in my stomach, I began to look at the strange gods, images, idols, etc. and also at the people of this area with wonder.

But as I was still looking at these strange things and the people who were going to and fro on this clean wide road, there I heard suddenly that the door of a house was slammed gently behind me. So without hesitation and fear, I looked at my back as I was startled. But to my surprise and fear I saw one little girl and one little boy (as I call them) who came out from a small house, and both were coming to me. Both girl and boy were of the same age of about seven years, as I thought them to be. They were of the same height. Their height was very accurate. Both were light-coloured children. Both were dressed in the colours of the rainbow. The girl wore on her neck long ornamented pure gold beads which flowed towards her waist. Well-polished and ornamented gold beads were on both her wrists. The head-tie which was on her head was made from a very costly material. The material had multi-colours such as red lines which went across white, blue went across yellow, while green lines went across cream. Her hair was beautifully plaited in many attractive styles. She put very fine antimony on both eyelashes. Her multi-coloured wrapper nearly touched her ankles.

Her teeth where whiter than a white cloth, and her partner who was a young boy was well-dressed in male dresses. His dresses were of the same kind of material as that of the delicate damsel. The multi-coloured dresses fitted him so much that one who saw him this day would strongly believe that he and the damsel were indeed descended from heaven together with the dresses. The cap of his race which was on his head was beautifully ornamented with highly polished gold and silver. Every part of his delicate body which was exposed was very clean and fresh and attractive to the eyes. And the hair on his eye-lids was very glossy as if it was polished every moment. The appearance of the boy and his delicate damsel proved that they were wiser and more clever than their age. Yet, these two beautiful little persons were not proud of themselves at all. But of course, I could not yet confirm whether they were human beings. Nor could I confirm yet whether the delicate damsel was the wife of the delicate boy. I was greatly confused about this still.

As both of them walked out smartly from the small house this morning, and I saw them as they were walking abreast toward me, I could not believe my eyes at all and my first “mind” and second “mind” who were my partners, were also confused whether these two little fellows were angels or human beings. But to my surprise and fear, as I was still looking at them with wonder and fear, they walked to me and then they stood in front of me. They had hardly stood and clapped three times and then bowed for me and for the two “removable heads” which were on top of the two-headed spear of the devil, when the beautiful boy started to warn me in a poem, with a strange voice which was as sweet as honey. And the delicate girl had also various kinds of sweet or melodious voices which could force a person who listened to them to dance into the fire unnoticed.

So the delicate boy started to warn me, as the girl started to move here and there according to how the warning went in bass, tenor, treble, etc.: “What has forced you to lay your hands to do evil things? What is your gain in the evils you have in your mind? All of your thoughts in your mind have been exposed to our mother, the omniscient Witch-Herbalist. Of course, our omnipresent mother (the Witch-Herbalist) knows also all of creatures’ thoughts! You are thinking of the bad people. But our mother, the greatest Witch-Herbalist, is thinking of your own problems! All of the corners in your heart are already exposed to our omnipresent mother! Before you start to think, my friend, please, think of the omniscient mother first! Please, my wayfarer, let me ask from you first, who are you and how did you come about the two ‘removable heads’? Because I have already conceived important words and I want to deliver the important questions as when a pregnant woman delivers a baby! But when I ask the questions from you, please answer them in your mind! They are not questions you can answer aloud!

“I ask, whose son are you? Are you the son of the rich man of yesterday or of the day before yesterday? Are you the son of a common father or of a wealthy father? Because I know myself and I know what I am! I know who is my father! For my mother showed me to my father immediately she had delivered me! I know the house where I was born and I know the verandah where I have become full-grown as you see me now! My mother is not split (that is, not rich) and my father is not rich either. But the omnipotent mother takes up all our and many others’ responsibilities. Both my great mother and father are not so poor that they have no dresses to wear.

“Nevertheless, I shall take one’s mother to be my mother simply because my own mother is not rich! My own mother is my own mother for ever! So as well, I shall never dash my own father to a beggar simply because he is not rich! For it is a bastard who throws his father away! My own mother is important to me and it is so I count my father to be important! I shall not behave like the son of another man! Thus I shall not bring troubles to my mother and father. For I know the breadth and width and length of my mother and father in our house! Nor shall I behave like a bastard and like a stubborn boy! When I am among the sons of the rich fathers, I always remember our house, that I come from a poor family!

“When I am among the sons of the common people, I never boast, I am never proud and I never insult them. But I behave always like the son of the poor father! And when I have money in hand, I am never proud or do like one who has uncountable bags of money in hand! When I am dressed in fine clothes, I never stand in front of those who wear rags. For I always remember how my father and mother are. I know whose son I am! For one who finds evil will get evil! And when a woman is fed up with being barren, she prays for a ‘born and die baby’ so that people may not call her barren. But what is the use when the baby is dead and then she becomes barren as before? But never say die!”

As the delicate little boy had encouraged me in a poem, and as I was still dropping my head up and down heavily and slowly and nodding to left and right, which showed that I understood his poem, the delicate girl began to sing suddenly and she and her delicate boy started to dance gently to and fro in front of me. The song was sung in proverbs of their own race, in a very lovely voice:

“I have set that of yesterday and of last year aside. But I now bring that of today! Take it and taste it, it is honey! The song which makes even a mourner become extremely happy is in my mouth! The eagle takes the sacrifice without trouble, but if the kite of the sky takes it, he will become the propitiatory sacrifice of the gods. This is not being a braggart! It is only the deer that the hound can kill and not the tiger! We have become full-grown delicate fellows, the people are jealous of us. The fruit-tree is growing taller but the fruit-pluckers are annoyed! One who wears only an apron is merely tying himself with a rope. Only one who is present when a person is dying is the person who can give true information to the cruel persons!

“One who is knocked dead by death cannot shout, nor could he come back from heaven to tell the people what had happened to him. So if you have money in hand, if you are rich, I will help you to thank the omniscient mother, the Witch-Herbalist! If you become a very important person in your town, indeed, I shall help you to increase your happiness. But if, by chance, you become a rich man, never forget your generation, your family. Please, remember where you were born and who bore you as a son. I remind you of this strongly! Because the puppy who did not remember our mother, the greatest Witch-Herbalist, in his early days, has become a mere barking dog. And those stubborn people who did not remember our omniscient mother, are still in prison and are still receiving severe punishment all their days!

“And there is no other witch doctor who can heal up poverty, nay, he is not yet born on earth! As well, the most super-human who can heal up evil does not yet exist in this world! Please take my song and taste it and learn many useful senses from it, for it is honey!”

It was like that this delicate damsel sang her song in front of me as the delicate boy supported this song of encouragement with flatteries at intervals. But as I was much encouraged by the warnings of these two delicate young fellows, I was not aware when I dropped my head down heavily again. Then I began to sort out hundreds of useful and various kinds of meanings from it with my second “mind”. But I was so surprised that when I lifted up my head, I did not see them again. Both of them had returned to their house. And this time I had ample time to look at their house very well. This house was as beautiful as the palace of a king. But it was so small that it could not contain more than two rooms, even, each of the rooms could not be more than twelve by twelve metres, but excluding the sitting room which was not more than ten metres.

The walls were well painted with very beautiful multi-coloured paints. The doors and windows were well polished. Many kinds of beautiful flowers surrounded the house, and the ground which surrounded it was very clean. Those beautiful flowers hid the tiny house from the view of the people, except those who had already known that there was a house. It was about two hundred metres from the road of the Remote Town. A very clean and attractive path went from there to the road, and various kinds of beautiful flowers also hid the path from the view of the people.

So as I was still in great embarrassment at their disappearance, I saw that both of them walked out from their small fine house. The delicate boy held one bowl and the delicate damsel held in each hand one covered basin. Both of them walked abreast gently to me and they put all in front of me. Then the girl told me to remove the covers of the basins and bowl. I was greatly happy when I removed the covers of the basins and bowl and I saw in the basins different kinds of nice food. And in the bowl, there was clean and cold water.

But when I saw all these things, I hastily lifted my head and I fastened my eyes on both of them with contentment of mind. Having seen that I was happy with the food and water, they told me to eat and to drink the water, because they knew that I was nearly dying of hunger at that time. But as I bent my head down and started to eat the nice food, they turned their eyes to the two-headed spear which I had seized from the hideous devil-worshipper when I fought him and his raiders on the shrine-field. Both were very confused as to whether I was a human being or the spirit of the devil, because it was not easy at all to get or to be in possession of the spear of the devil. They were also confused when they saw the two Crazy Removable-Headed Wild Man’s heads on top of the spear.

As I was still enjoying the food, I did not know when both of them went back to their house. Of course, I did not mind their disappearance at all but I continued to eat the food with greediness. And as the food was very nice and as it was my most favourite food, my morsels were so big and were swallowed so ravenously that within a few twinklings, I swallowed all of it. Although the different kinds of people who were passing on the road in lukewarmness saw me eating the food with such greediness that they made mockery of me, I did not bother about that.

So as soon as I had finished the food, I drank the clean cold water. But when I lifted my head, I did not see these two delicate fellows in front of me. They were just coming out from their house with one beautiful colt. The colt was already saddled and a small rein was in its mouth. The boy held the rein of the colt as he and the girl were coming back to me. Having brought it before me, they told me to stand up and I did so at the same time. Then the girl told me to pack up all my belongings. And as soon as she told me, I packed all, I put the juju-bag, food-bag and bow and arrows on my left shoulder as usual. I held the spear on top of which the two “removable heads” were pierced with the left hand, while I held my heavy matchet with the right hand.

As I was doing all this, the delicate girl packed both basins and the bowl, and she returned them to their house. Then as soon as she returned, she mounted the colt, and she told me to mount it behind her while the delicate boy mounted it as well at my back, which meant the three of us had mounted the colt but I was in the middle. After that, the girl who held the rein directed the colt to the road. It was like that the three of us were riding the colt along on the road toward the Remote Town. Then these two delicate little fellows began to sing a kind of song unexpectedly. This song was so fascinating that the three of us began to dance madly along on the road. I danced with happiness even more than these two fellows because I had never heard such a fascinating kind of song as this one since when I was born.

But I continued to notice all of the gods, idols, images, etc. which were lined up on both banks of this road like soldiers. And many villagers were also lined up along both sides of it. Several people who carried the dead bodies of their sons, daughters, fathers, etc. were seen travelling on this road. All were going as hastily as they could to the Witch-Herbalist to help them.

As I took part in this fascinating and lovely song which these two little delicate fellows were singing and dancing on the back of the colt, this strange song was also intoxicating the pretty colt as if it had drunk a strong drink. It was so intoxicated by the song that it also was dancing with us along the road of the Remote Town. Alas! as all of us were still dancing and singing loudly with great joy along the road, we came to the large gate of the Remote Town when it was about the sixth hour of the evening. But the usual deceitful sun of the evening was still in the sky, for this time was the dry season.

As soon as we rode to the large gate, the gateman stopped us and all of us reluctantly dismounted. Then the gateman, who had already known the two delicate fellows, shook hands with them as all of them smiled. Then he turned his eyes to me and asked gently: “What are you going to do in the town of our Omniscient Witch-Herbalist, my friend?” I explained to him: “I am going to the witch-mother to help me make the juju-medicine which can make my barren wife pregnant!” But when I explained to him like that with a very sad voice, and as the two delicate fellows were looking on, he fastened his eyes on the two “removable heads” and the spear. He looked at both with confusion and fear for a few twinklings. After that he shook his head up and down, and when he stopped he paused for many twinklings as he still stared at the heads and spear marvellously.

Then after a while he said loudly: “Your own burden is quite simple. Quite different from those who are going there with their dead and half-dead people! But you have to pay the gate-fee first before you can be allowed to pass through the gate to the town! And the gate-fee is four copper pennies!” When this gateman asked for the gate money I breathed in heavily with sorrow, because I had got not even one copper penny in hand for the past six years. But to my surprise and great joy, before I breathed out, the delicate little girl had brought out four copper pennies from her pocket and then she gave them to the gateman.

When he received the money from the delicate girl, he said that he agreed for me to enter the town, but that would be tomorrow morning. These two delicate fellows stretched the rein of the colt to me. When I took it from their hands, they told me with a smile that the colt was a gift to me and that it had become my own property as from that evening. They told me further that I should ride it back to my town whenever I finished with the Witch-Herbalist. “All right, goodbye, the sufferer, goodbye!”

When both of them had bade me goodbye, they turned their backs to the gate and then both began to walk along gently on the road. And when I had looked at them until when they were lost to my eyes, I tied the rope of the colt to one small tree near the gate. After that, I put my belongings down and then I lay down in front of them and I slept within a few twinklings. But as soon as it was daybreak, the gateman woke me up, he told me to tie all my belongings together. Having done so, except for the cruse, I put them near my colt. But I fixed on the ground before the colt the two-headed spear on top of which the two “removable heads” were pierced.

Having done all that, this gateman explained to me that my property, such as these things, was not allowed to be taken to the Remote Town. He said further that it was only the cruse that he could allow me to take to the town. But he assured me that I would meet all my belongings as I left them, whenever I returned from the town. He gave further assurance that he would be feeding my colt till when I returned. So as soon as I had done all that he asked me to do, he opened the gate for me and then I passed through there to the road of the Remote Town.

But I was greatly happy when I took the cruse out from my juju-bag and I saw that it had not broken or cracked at all on the way to this gate of the Remote Town, despite several kinds of hardships, etc. which I had met in the wild jungles, etc. Now this gave me much hope that my mission with the Witch-Herbalist would be successful. And again, I believed this day that, indeed the “Supreme Second” of my wife was so kind to her that she was really ready to help her, otherwise the cruse should have been broken on the way or at the several times that I fought with the wild people of the wild jungles, etc. Again, I thanked my own “Supreme Second” greatly, who was also my guard, who was so kind to me that he guided me from my town to the Remote Town.





The Remote Town




But when I had travelled very fast this morning for one hundred and eighty twinklings, I reached the town at the tenth hour of the morning. So, after I had experienced much hardship, punishment, etc. in the wild jungles, etc. at last, I reached the town of the Witch-Herbalist. As I began to travel along in this town, I noticed that it was very big, beautiful, and very clean and that it flourished with all the wealth of the world. The shrines of gods, images, idols, etc. were seen in every part of the town. The houses were very beautiful and were in rows. All the inhabitants were dressed neatly and tidily. They were happy always because the Omniscient Mother helped them to overcome all of their difficulties every time.

The Witch-Mother was the ruler of the town. Although she had many paramount chiefs who also assisted her, there was no king. She controlled everything there with kindness. Every one of the houses was lavishly painted with multi-coloured paints, and it was so for the shrines of their gods, etc. They spoke only one language which I understood very well. The people of this town were semi-deathless because their Witch-Mother was omniscient and she had a very powerful omnipotence. The whole people were forced to worship the Mother every morning and evening, but a special ceremony was performed for her once a year as if she was God, Almighty. And so everyone worshipped his or her own god, etc. every day.

As I held the cruse with my left hand and went further into the town, I came to the palace of the Witch-Mother and I went direct to the entrance, with the rags on my body and with my dirty bushy beard. But when I came to the entrance and as I wanted to pass through there to the palace, the porter hastily stopped me and then hastily walked back a bit with fear before he asked from me that what was my purpose to go to the palace. This porter asked this question from me with fear because he thought I was a mad man and, in fact, my appearance was so rough and fearful to see at this time that anyone who took me as a mad man was not mistaken and was not to be blamed at all. But I explained to him that I came from a very far town just to see the Witch-Mother to help me make my barren wife pregnant. He allowed me to go in when he listened to my explanation which he thought was reasonable and sensible.

Then I walked into the palace without fear, with the cruse on my left shoulder in which the juju-soup would be prepared for my barren wife. Although as soon as I had walked a bit in the palace, I came to one strange, mighty, tall, corpulent and very fearful man who leaned his back on one of the mighty pillars of the palace ready to challenge anyone who came to see the Mother.





In the Palace of the Witch-Herbalist




Then this fearful corpulent man challenged me with his fearful voice: “Who are you?” But I replied at the same time and with a sad voice: “I am one of the burdensome persons.” “Well, if that be the case, go direct to the Mother!” he pointed his hand to where the throne of the Mother was in the palace. Then I went direct to that part of this very beautiful palace. After a while, I walked with fear to the throne of the Mother. The throne was in the centre of the half-circle. The half-circle was so large that it contained many well and fine stuffed high seats on which her paramount chiefs or subjects were sitting. But of course the throne of the Witch-Mother was very big and high that it was seen clearly from the entrance of the hall or palace.

As I was allowed to walk to the throne by the fearful corpulent man, I noticed that several kinds of images of living creatures, such as those of tigers, lions, boa constrictors, elephants, cows, crocodiles, mermaids, rhinoceros, etc. were hung all over the walls. But after a while, and as I stopped before the throne, one of the paramount chiefs of the mother challenged me, he shouted horribly without making any motion: “Who are you?” I nearly fainted for fear at this time, because his voice was too strange to me and it was heard very far away as if one stood far away and shouted at me in a very terrible way, especially when none of them opened their mouth and shouted like that unexpectedly. All of them seemed as if they were already dead.

However, I replied with a trembling voice: “I am the wild hunter of the wild animals who has come to see the Omniscient Mother for help!” But I had hardly replied when another one shouted horribly on me: “All right, sit down on one of the big chairs which are in front of the throne!” To my surprise the voice of this one was heard far away in the palace as well. However, I sat on that big chair which was a bit far from the half-circle. And then I waited for the Witch-Mother to return because she was not on the throne at that time.

But as I began to look at all the strange things which were hung on the throne and around it, I saw one small house which was for the private meeting between the Mother and her paramount chiefs. It was at the extreme end of the palace. It had one entrance, but I did not know yet whether it had another entrance which went through to the premises of the palace. As I still fastened my eyes on this small house, I saw the Mother coming out through the entrance with four of her attendants. All were following at her back. Then when she walked to the half circle, and before she sat on the throne, I observed that all of her paramount chiefs lifted their heads at this time from their chairs. They bowed for her with due respect and then she sat down on the throne as soon as she had responded. So it was at this time that these paramount chiefs made a motion like a living thing for the first time in my presence.

But before the Witch-Mother or Omniscient Mother turned her face to me, she first turned her face to her chiefs and made some fun with them for about thirty twinklings. Although these paramount chiefs were so old that they had become almost deathless people, when they burst into funny laughter, their voices were heard loudly all over the palace like an echo.

As she was still making fun with them, I had ample time to watch her appearance. This Witch-Herbalist was also called the Omnipotent, Omnipresent and Omniscient Mother by her people and by her grandchildren, who were the two delicate fellows who gave me one colt, and by the burdensome people. She was so old that she had already become a deathless old woman as well as or like her chiefs. She was very beautiful and her body was still as strong and fresh as that of a young woman. Although short white hair was on her chin and all over both cheeks, the strange crown which was on her head made it difficult for me to see whether there was black or white hair on the forehead.

She had various kinds of voices such as a huge voice, a light voice, a sharp voice, the voice of a baby, the voice of a girl, the voice of an old woman, the voice of a young man, the voice of an old man, the voice of a stammerer, the voice of boldness, the voice of boom, the voice of a weeping person, the voice which was amusing and which was annoying, the voice like that of a ringing bell, the voice of various kinds of birds and beasts. And she spoke and understood all kinds of languages, of humans, beasts, birds, evil spirits, immortal beings, etc.

Therefore, this Witch-Herbalist had no interpreter who interpreted for her the languages of the thousands of various kinds of people who were bringing their burdens to her. Furthermore, she used the voice which sounded like a bell whenever she called one or more of her attendants, instead of using a call-bell. What I observed as well of this Omnipotent Witch-Mother, was that the kind of crown which was on her head was made of superior polished silver. It was very high and lavishly ornamented with the images of a vulture, parrot, lion, leopard, and cock, and with the full-length image of a small stuffed lion on the pinnacle of the crown. All these made the Mother very horrible to see as well.

But another thing which I observed was that each of her eye-balls, which were very tiny but sharp and bright, sent a hot ray to a long distance. The hot ray was so hot that it would burn the eyes of one who looked at her eyes for more than five-sixtieths of a twinkling. Therefore, it was hard for one to look at both eyes as long as he or she wanted to. Then the third thing which I noticed was that on her neck and both wrists there were more than fifty beads of silver and more than fifty beads of coral on her neck as well. All of them were flowing down to her breast, and small images of all kinds of creatures, carved from superior elephant tusk, were fastened to both silver and coral beads.

Again, her elbows downward to her wrists were lavishly decorated with the most superior diamond beads. All were brightening every place where she rested her arms. Then her thighs downward to her ankles were also lavishly decorated with the well-polished leather of boa constrictor, and also highly polished complete skeletons of snakes were tied round them. Again, strange shoes which were made from the well-refined skin of the tiger were on her feet. And as she sat on her throne, she rested each foot on the back of each of the two living tigers which faced the front wildly and with furious dark brown eyes.

The strange and fearful frock which ran from her neck down to her lap so beautified her that she was indeed the pride of this Remote Town. So there was not any woven cloth on her body at all. Again, I noticed that all the walls of this palace were beautifully freckled with different kinds of colours of very expensive paints which could only be found in this town of the Omniscient Mother.

So when she had made some fun with her paramount chiefs for some twinklings, and as I was still looking at her fearful appearance and also at uncountable wonderful things which were in the palace, she turned her eyes to me unexpectedly. Without hesitation, she asked from me loudly at first with a hoarse voice: “Who is the Chief Priest of gods, idols, spirits, etc. of your town?” But as her voice was too hoarse, I did not understand her question. So, without fear, I told her: “Your voice is too hoarse for me to understand it!” When I told her so, she changed her voice to that of a cock, and she asked the same question from me. But I told her: “I do not understand the language of the cock!”

Having heard this from me, she changed her voice to that of beasts, and she asked the same question from me. But I told her that so far I did not belong to the beast race, and I did not understand the language of the beasts at all. Then she changed her voice to that of the evil spirits. But I hastily shook my head to show that we did not speak the language of the evil spirits in my town, nor did we understand those of birds, snakes, immortal creatures, etc.

But at last, when the Witch-Mother saw that I did not understand any of these strange languages, she asked the question from me with the stutterer’s voice. Yet, I shook my head to left and right, and I told her that so far I was not a stammerer, I did not understand what she was asking from me. When I did not understand, she asked again the same question from me with the voice of that of a weeping person, the voice of a laughing person, the voice which was amusing and the voice which was annoying. Then at last she changed her voice to that of human languages. So this time she first asked the question from me in the language of the Tiv, but I told her that I had not even been to Northern Nigeria. Then in the language of the Igbo, yet I told her that I had not even been to the boundary of Western Nigeria. Having heard this from me again she paused for a while.

Now, at this stage, her paramount chiefs who were so old that they had already become deathless, had been seated motionless on their beautiful and well-stuffed chairs all the time, expecting the next language which the Omniscient Witch-Mother was going to speak to me. But as the Mother looked at both my eyes, and as the hot ray of her eyes penetrated into my eyes and was so hot that it nearly burnt my eyes, she asked in plain language, in Yoruba, the language of Western Nigeria: “Who is the chief of the idols, gods, images, etc. worshippers in your town?” This she asked with a sharp voice.

But now, as this time she asked the question from me in the language of my town, and as I now understood what she asked from me at last, I replied at the same time with a clear voice: “My father is the Chief of the idols, gods, images, god of the river, etc. worshippers, and sometimes people call him the Chief Priest of gods, god of the river, idols, images, etc.” So having heard so from me, she and her paramount chiefs nodded for a while, and then she stood up from her throne, and her paramount chiefs hastily stood up as well from their chairs. They bowed for her for a few sixtieths of a twinkling, or till a horrible cry of a bird was heard from where I did not know.

So as soon as the horrible cry of a bird was heard loudly like the echo, all of the paramount chiefs stood upright now in attention, and the Witch-Mother began to walk gently along to that small private house which was at the extreme end of the palace. It was in this private house that the Omniscient Witch-Mother and her paramount chiefs were holding very important meetings. So the chiefs, the attendants and the two tigers on whom she used to rest her feet, stood up and followed them as well. And as I was in the middle of them, I began to wonder whether they were going to sacrifice me to the god of the Mother.

But when I walked with them to the small house, two of the attendants ran to the door and opened it widely. Then the Mother entered first with her two tigers. After that the rest of us entered. All of us had hardly entered when the two attendants shut the door back at the same time. The inside of the small house was dark immediately the door was shut, but I saw the inside by the help of the flaring light which was hung on the wall. I was greatly surprised that the inside of this small house was so big that it contained many large rooms, sitting rooms, etc. As the Witch-Mother who was in front of us was walking along in the wide passage and the rest of us were following her, I noticed that hundreds of various kinds of birds were the occupants of the big rooms. And to my surprise again, as we were following the Mother, these birds began to flap their wings loudly and were crying loudly. But having noticed their moods very well I understood that they were not ordinary birds but the birds of Witch, so this gave me real credence that the Mother was indeed powerful.

After a while, we followed the Mother to the extreme end of the small house where there was a large gate through to the premises, and we followed her to those premises. These premises, as I called them, were so wide that they contained more than one thousand big houses. These houses were for people who were bringing their burdens to the Mother. But the Mother and her paramount chiefs lived in a mighty building which was not too far from those which were for the burdensome people. And it was in these same premises, which were like a very large town, that the Hall of Assembly of the Mother was built.





In the Hall of Assembly

of the Mother




But when the keeper of this Hall of Assembly saw that the Mother was coming, he hastily opened the large doors. As she entered, the rest of us followed her. Then she went direct to the altar where there was a strange mighty organ. The organist who sat ready before the organ was a very short and corpulent man, but he seemed in his uniform exactly like a very big red bird with a large comb on his head. So the Mother sat at the right of the organist who was just like a big red bird, her Covenanter sat at the right as well. The paramount chiefs sat on well-stuffed long benches opposite the Mother. The attendants sat at their back, while I sat at the back of the attendants.

Then as soon as every one was seated, I continued to look at the “bird-like organist” and also at many other fearful things which were in this worshipping hall or Hall of Assembly. So in this HALL OF ASSEMBLY OF THE WITCH-HERBALIST OR THE OMNISCIENT MOTHER, there were more than one million big racks. Each of the racks contained thousands of large pigeon-holes. It was in these pigeon-holes that different kinds of medicine were kept ready for use by the people of her Remote Town, and also for use by the whole people who brought their burdens to her. All of these miraculous medicines were prepared from herbs, etc. The dispensers of the Mother who worked in the dispensary were more than two thousand. But to my surprise, when I looked at the “bird-like organist” of the Mother very well, I saw that he had a beak which was about one metre long and it was curved inward so that it was thick in a strange way. He had large wings, claws, etc. like that of a bird of prey. He was banned from playing the organ if he was not in his uniform.

It was in this hall that the Mother, her paramount chiefs, her attendants, the whole people of the town and all the burdensome people were worshipping every morning and evening. But if one of the burdensome people failed to attend the service even once during the period of one year that he or she would stay there, the Mother would send him or her away from her town without helping him or her to take his or her burdens away.

As I continued to look at all the wonders which were in this hall, the whole people of the town, and all the burdensome people who were more than three thousand, entered the hall. And every one sat on benches and then kept quiet. Then I saw that the Mother stood up suddenly. She walked into one small dressing room which was at a little distance from the strange organist. After a while, she came out in a very fearful dress. To my fear, this Mother had changed to another terrible thing—a monster? This I could not confirm yet. Her head was exactly like that of her “bird-like organist”, but her powerful eyes remained as they were and her frock was as it was, although she had wings like that of her “bird-like organist” and both were deep red as well. This was her normal dress this evening.

As soon as she walked out from that small dressing room, all of her paramount chiefs, the attendants, the Covenanter, the people of the town and the whole of the burdensome people hastily stood up and waited in attention until the Mother walked gently to the altar. Then she sat down on the high and large chair which was close to the altar and the mighty organ. Then we bowed for her before we sat down. So I continued to look at every part of this hall with wonder. But as I was still looking at the strange objects which were hung on the walls, the noble men and women of the Witch walked in procession from outside to the hall. All sat on the special chairs which were next to the right of the Mother. It was at this time I knew that the Mother and paramount chiefs, etc. were waiting for the other members.

These noble men and women of the Witch were dressed in very costly garments, which were their uniform. Each of them was very old and both men and women were bald. But as I still fastened eyes on these noble men and women with great wonder, for they were terrible, I heard suddenly the sound of a mighty bell from the outside of the hall. The sound of this bell was like that of the church. Then as soon as the sound of the bell was heard, the “bird-like organist” of the Mother first swelled out his large wings and both nearly covered the mighty organ. But as he was ready to start to play the organ, the Mother, her paramount chiefs, Covenanter, attendants, the noble men and women stood up. I too stood up later, when I saw that all the people of the town and the other burdensome people like myself stood up.

Then without hesitation, the Mother together with her chiefs etc. began to sing the song of praise with one voice as the “bird-like organist” began to play the organ to the anthem in different tones such as treble, alto, bass, etc. And it was at this time I understood that this “bird-like organist” was the organist of this worshipping Hall of Assembly. To my surprise, as soon as each verse of the song was sung to the end there was a great applause. Although the song of praise was long, it was so fascinating that the Witch-Mother and the rest of the people left their seats, they mixed up and then they began to dance, and they were clapping with great joy as they were jumping here and there in the hall.

But after a while that I had listened to this fascinating song and the fascinating music which the “bird-like organist” was playing to it, I did not know when I joined them to dance with great joy. At this time I had forgotten my burden which I brought to the Mother. This meant for me that: “The drunkard has forgotten his poverty and sorrow. But he comes back to his usual sadness as soon as he is conscious.”

It was so that the whole of us danced with great applause for about one hundred and twenty twinklings like a mad man. But as soon as the Mother announced loudly that every one should stop dancing and go back to his or her seat, we did as she ordered us to do and she too went back to her seat. Then she announced loudly again that we should kneel down and close our eyes. When we did so, she praised the God Almighty for about twenty twinklings. Then she told us to sit back on our seats. But I wondered greatly that all of the songs which we sang were from the Gospel Hymn Book. Although the people called her Witch-Mother, she did not pray to the witches but to the God Almighty. It was not idols, gods, images or witches that they worshipped in this Hall of Assembly.

So having rested for a few twinklings, hundreds of waiters brought delicious food and drinks of various kinds from the kitchens which were not too far from the Hall of Assembly. They served the food, drinks and cold water to every one of us. So after we had eaten and drunk to our entire satisfaction, we rested for a while. The Mother and her Covenanter, in his uniform of crimson, stood up. And at the same time the other people including myself stood up as well. As soon as all of us had bowed low for them, both of them walked into the dressing room. After a while, both of them walked out from the room with a very slow step. The Covenanter, who had now dressed in another kind of uniform, was in front of the Mother. He held up one long mace. This mace was a complete skeleton of a human and he himself was dressed in the skin of a lion which covered his neck down to a half-part of his body.

The skull of the lion was on his head and it was just like a helmet. So his head downward to the half-part of his body was not visible. But the Mother who was following him with a slow step was also more terrible to see at this time. As they walked out from the dressing room, the whole of us stood up and we bowed for them until they walked slowly to the altar. But when the Mother sat on her seat, and her Covenanter stood up with the mace of the skeleton of a human in his hands in front of the “bird-like organist”, then we sat back. After the whole of the people and the Mother had kept quiet for some twinklings as if we paid respect for one who was dead, the Mother stood up again. She told us to kneel down, and then she prayed to the God Almighty for more than sixty twinklings.

After the prayer, she told us to stand up and every one of us did so. Then we sang and danced together for some twinklings as the “bird-like organist” played fascinating music to the song. After that, the service came to an end at midnight. And then the Witch-Mother told one of her servants to take me to one of the vacant guest houses which was at a distance of about three-eighths of a kilometre from the Hall of Assembly. So as the servant began to lead me to the guest house, the Mother and the other people returned to their houses. But to my surprise, the “bird-like organist” did not leave the Hall of Assembly as all of the other people did, but I believe he lived there.

After some twinklings, the servant led me to the vacant guest house and he told me to put up in one of the rooms. But he warned me seriously before he left that I must take great care of the cruse in which the Mother was going to prepare the juju-soup which would make my barren wife pregnant. As this room had already been equipped with sufficient amenities, I lay down on the soft bed and then I slept, as soon as the servant had left.

When I woke in the morning, I went to the Hall, and I was shocked to see that the whole people of the Remote Town and thousands of the burdened people had gathered in the Hall and all were ready for the morning service. So I thanked my “Supreme Second” greatly for helping me not to be late for the service, otherwise the Mother would drive me away from her town that morning, because it was against her law. If one or more of the burdensome people failed to attend the morning and evening services even once for the period of one year that he or she was staying there, the witch-mother would not take his or her burdens away.

Then after the morning prayer, we ate and drank to our entire satisfaction. After that, all of the burdensome people returned to their guest houses. And the Mother, her paramount chiefs, noble men and women and the attendants with the Mother’s two tigers, went to the palace. They kept themselves there ready to receive the new burdened people who would arrive that day.

When I returned to my room, I sat on the back of one large image of an eagle. But I had hardly sat down when I raised my head up and I saw the images of various kinds of birds which were hung on the walls of the room. These images were so carefully carved from superior wood that one who did not fasten his or her eyes on them well would take them as living birds. Having looked at them with wonder for a few twinklings, I stood up, I walked to the outside of the room. So when I saw that hundreds of guest houses were on the same lines as the one in which I was put up, then without hesitation, I walked into one which was next to mine. In that house I met more than one hundred people who brought their burdens to the Omniscient Mother as well as to myself, and they were waiting for the period of one year after which the mother would attend to them. As I met these burdensome people in that guest house, I greeted them with a cheerful voice. But only a few of them answered and the rest only shook their heads. They could not answer my greetings because their burdens were so severe that they were unable to open their mouths and reply. I left them at the same time and I walked to the front of the house, when I saw that their burdens were more than my own. Then I entered another one of the houses. Although I met several hundreds of the burdensome people in it, there was none of them who answered my salutation at all. Their burdens had paralysed every one of them. So having seen them in this condition, I returned to my room. I sat on the usual image of an eagle, and then I began to recount all the punishments, difficulties, hardships, etc. which I had encountered before I reached the Remote Town.

But my first “mind” and second “mind” who were my partners and advisers, hastily consoled me as soon as I wanted to become sad when I thought of these things. Of course, my “memory” recorded this down for both “minds” as “a good behaviour”, although it did not overlook their past offences.





The Complete Skeleton Man




One day, two days, three days, it was like that I began to count the days on and on until one year was reached. But when there were two days away from reaching one year, the Mother announced to all of the burdensome people, as soon as the morning service was ended, that she would attend to all of the burdensome people who would have completed one year in two days’ time. She told us further that we must be in the hall at the eighth hour of the morning.

But it was hardly the eighth hour of the morning when the whole of us who had completed one year rushed to the hall and sat quietly before the arrival of the Omniscient Witch-Herbalist, her paramount chiefs, noble men and women, attendants, servants and her dispensers who were more than two thousand, her “bird-like organist” and her Covenanter. So as soon as they had arrived in the hall in their special fearful uniforms which were for this important day, but excluding the Mother and her Covenanter who were not yet in their uniforms, the Mother and her Covenanter stood up and walked into the small dressing room. Then both of them dressed in their special uniforms which were for this important day. But their dresses this morning were so hideous that many of us who were burdensome people nearly fainted for fear. Then as soon as she sat on her seat she rested each of her feet on the back of each of the two living tigers. And her Covenanter who held high up the mace of the complete skeleton of a human stood near her, and the “bird-like organist” got ready to play his usual fascinating music.

Then without hesitation the Mother and her Covenanter sang a kind of fascinating song, while the organist played very lovely music to it. After, the Mother called loudly the surname of a man who sat near me. She told him to come before the altar. Then the man stood up with fear and wonder, because he was extremely surprised how the Witch-Mother knew his name. But when this man stood up and started to walk to the altar with the noises which the bones of his body were making, the rest of us shook heads with great pity because he had already dried up to the bones. But as every one of us still fastened eyes on him with wonder for his appearance, which was too gruesome, the Mother who was omniscient asked him to tell her the type of his burdens.

Then this skeleton man explained to her: “Since I attained the age of ten, it has happened that the more I eat the more I feel terrible hunger. Having seen this, I began to eat every five twinklings but this did not help at all. Instead, I began to get lean gradually until I became lean to the bone. So when the people of my village saw this my dreadful appearance, they drove me away from the village. So I began to live in the bush with the bush animals. And it was when I was fifty years of age, I heard from one man who advised me to come to you to help me!”

When this skeleton man had told the story of his burden to the Witch-Herbalist like that, and all of the paramount chiefs, and the rest of her members saw the hideous appearance of this man, they breathed out heavily with grief. The Mother and her members and the rest of us who were the burdensome people fastened eyes on him for more than ten twinklings. Then the Mother told him to come nearer to the platform of the altar. So this skeleton man began to struggle to climb the platform on which the Mother sat near the altar. But alas! this skeleton man could not climb it at all because he had become a real skeleton, although he was breathing.

Having struggled with the great noise which his dried skeleton was making, and having reached the place where the hands of the Mother could reach him, he stopped. But when the Mother examined him, she found in fact that he had already dried to the bone. So the Mother and her members condoled with him upon the loss of his muscles for many twinklings.

Then the Mother performed a certain expiation for him first. After that she told one of her dispensers to bring from the rack a certain red ointment. When the ointment was brought, she gave it to the skeleton man and she told him to rub all his skeleton body with it. But to the great surprise of the rest of us who were the burdensome people, this skeleton man had very fresh muscle all over his body and he became fat as well at the same time. But when this man saw that he had become as a man should be, he did not know when he jumped high up and down, and then began to dance and sing with great happiness which could not be described. Having done this for a few twinklings, the Mother stopped him. She told him to return to his village at the same time. Then this happy man prostrated before the altar and praised the Omniscient Mother for bringing him back to the man who had muscle on his body. But the Mother hastily told him not to praise her but God Almighty.

As he wanted to start his journey back to his village, the Covenanter of the Mother told him to promulgate to the people of his village who had saved him from his burden. Then this man bowed for him and the Mother and also for the members of the Mother with great respect and happiness, and then he left the Hall of Assembly.





The Bald Lady




The skeleton man had hardly left the hall with happiness when the Omniscient Mother or the Witch-Herbalist, called loudly the real name of the next person, who was a lady of about twenty years of age. This lady was so beautiful that there was not a man who saw her would refuse to marry her with any amount of money she might demand from him.

But when the Mother called her loudly by her surname without being told the name, she told her to come to the front of the altar to tell her her own burden, though the mother knew everyone’s burden already, because she was an Omniscient Mother. But her habit was to ask one to tell his or her own burden first by himself or herself to the hearing of her paramount chiefs, etc. and also to the other burdensome people.

Then with great shame, this beautiful lady reluctantly stood up. She walked to the front of the altar and it was at this time that every one saw clearly that she had not a single hair on her head. Her head was just sparkling like well-polished silver. So as all of us were gazing at her hairless head with wonder, she sobbed out the story of her baldness to the Mother. She told the Mother that she had hair on her head when she was born, it was even very beautiful and lovely. But one day, when her mother was away at the market, one old woman came and rubbed her head with her left hand. So as soon as the old woman did so, the lovely hair on her head vanished at the same time, and then the cruel old woman disappeared immediately.

This beautiful lady further explained to the Witch-Mother that when her mother returned to the house and saw that there was no more hair on her head, she asked what had happened to her hair, and the lady had told her mother how the cruel old woman came in and rubbed her head with her left hand. She added to the Witch-Mother that her mother and father and the other members of the family tried all their efforts to find the cruel woman, but all their efforts failed. So since that day the people of her town began to hate her and many were making mockery of her whenever she went about in the town. She told the Witch-Mother as well that there was not a man who had tried to marry her or even to speak to her. She said painfully that in a moment she was not happy at all, because of her baldness.

“So this is my own burden which I bring to you and I believe, you will help me to have lovely hair on my head as before.” It was like that this lady told the story of her baldness to the Witch-Mother as she was sobbing continuously.

Then after the Omniscient Witch-Mother had listened to the story of this very beautiful lady, she first remarked strongly:

“When the teeth fall away from the mouth of a lady, an important part of her beauty falls!

“When a lady has no hair on head, a more important part of her beauty falls away as well!

“So a beautiful lady who lacks these two things is unfortunate! Because beauty and good character fetch money and happiness for a lady!

“Now, I am going to disclose to you today, as I am really the Omniscient Mother or Witch-Herbalist of this Remote Town, that the cruel old woman who rubbed your head with her left hand when you were a child, was a strong beelzebub. She is still living inside a small hill which is at the back of your father’s house. And your lovely hair which she rubbed away from your head long ago is on her head now, although I am going to take the hair back from her now and I shall return it to your head today. But I tell you strongly now that as soon as you return to your town, you must tell your father to put plenty of dried refuse and dried wood on top of the hill, and having done so, to put fire on them. As soon as the fire has heated up the hill, the beelzebub will flee far away from your town!”

But when the Mother had talked to this bald lady like that, she told one of her dispensers to bring from the pigeon-holes one thick cloth. When he brought it and gave it to the Mother, we saw that many kinds of small roots were tied all over it. So she told the sobbing lady to kneel down and then she spread the cloth on her head. Then she lifted her head up and she recited some words which the rest of us did not understand. Then as soon as she raised her head down she pulled the cloth away from the head of the lady. But to the greatest surprise of every one of us, the head of this bald lady was full of beautiful and glossy hair.

Having seen it like that, the lady began to dance at the same time. And she was still in this joy when the Mother stopped her. Then the Covenanter warned her that when she returned to her town, she must not provoke the men of her town with her beauty. When the Covenanter had warned her like that, she bowed with great joy for the Mother and the rest of the Mother’s members. Then she started her journey to her town with satisfaction and happiness.





The Epileptic Man




As soon as the beautiful bald lady had got her natural hair back by the help of the courteous Witch-Herbalist, and had gone away, the Mother called loudly the name of the next burdensome man. She told him to come to the front of the altar. But to the greatest fear of the other burdensome people, as this epileptic man stood up from the seat, his epilepsy made him fall him down, and it made him fall him down so heavily that he became unconscious. After a while he became conscious, but he could not stand up and walk. Then he began to roll himself along on the floor to the front of the altar. But when he had struggled hard and reached the front of the altar, the mother saw that his epilepsy was too serious. So she hastily sent for one big pot which was on the rack. When the pot was brought to her, we saw that it was full up with roots of trees and water. Then she hastily poured the dark water which was in the pot all over the body of this man.

To everyone’s surprise, the dark water had hardly touched his body when he became more conscious, and then stood up healthily. Then the Mother told him to jump up three times. But as soon as he had jumped up three times, his epilepsy disappeared completely immediately. This man was so happy that he started to sing and dance with great joy. Having done so for a few twinklings, the Covenanter warned him to avoid abusing people. Then the Mother told him to return to his town. So he bowed and praised the Mother before he left the Hall of Assembly.





The Woman with One Ear




Immediately the epileptic man had been freed, he left the Hall of Assembly with great joy. The Witch-Herbalist or the Omniscient Mother, called out loudly the surname of the next burdensome person, who was a woman. She told her to come to the front of the altar. Without hesitation, the woman stood up and walked to the front of the altar, and it was at this time that the rest of the burdensome people observed that she had only one ear on the part of the right temple of her head. This ear was bigger than that of a human being. There was none at all at the left temple of her head, as it was usually for other people.

But when the Mother and her subjects saw that this woman had one big ear instead of two, she remarked loudly: “One ear does not fit the head! There are two categories of burdens and also there are two kinds of afflictions. One is ‘male’ and the other is ‘female’. Many people have the ‘male’ burdens or afflictions and many other people have the ‘female’ burdens or afflictions. So life is really difficult for the people who have the ‘male’ burdens or afflictions. But life is a bit more easy for the people who possess the ‘female’ burdens or afflictions!”

But as soon as the Mother had remarked like that, and hesitated, the woman told the Mother how she got one big ear instead of two. She explained to the Mother that she was a merciless “born and die baby”. She said that at first, she died three years after her mother bore her. She told the Mother further that it was so she died every three years since she was born. But when she died for the sixth time her mother and father understood that she was a “born and die baby”, and before they buried her false body this time, they cut off her left ear. But as soon as she returned to her company with only one ear, they drove her from their company because a “one-ear spirit” like her could not live with them any more. So this forced her to return to her mother in order to re-bear her. But unfortunately she was reborn this time with one big ear!

She explained to the Mother further that as she was reborn with one ear, she had no power any more to die. She said that since then she was carrying one ear about, although, she added to the Mother, she had deprived her mother and father of a lot of their property before both outwitted her as a “born and die baby”. It was like that this woman with one ear told her story to the Mother.

But the Witch-Mother, who had known everything already, asked from her: “What did you do with all your father’s and mother’s property which you had carried away by other means each time you died?”

But she explained to the Mother: “When I carried the property to my company, all of us shared it among ourselves, and it was so we were sharing all of the property which every one of us might bring from his or her unfortunate mother!” Again, the Witch-Herbalist who was also Omniscient Mother, wilfully asked from this “one-ear woman”: “By the way, how did you manage to deprive your mother and father of their property?” The woman explained: “Through the sacrifices, which were sometimes clothes, money, goats, fowls and many other valuable things, which the unfortunate mother sacrificed to gods when I pretended to be dead, so I might not die. But when I simply stopped breathing, the unfortunate mother, etc. would think that I had died. They would not understand that my death was a false one.

“So the false body would be buried. And after the body had been buried, then I would go back to the gods to which the sacrifices were given in order to prevent me from death. And by my spiritual powers I would collect all the sacrifices in forms of metamorphosis, although if the unfortunate mother had gone back to the gods, she would still see the sacrifices there. So having collected the valuable sacrifices in the form of metamorphosis, I would return to my company with them. So that is the life of the ‘born and die babies’.” Thus this “one-ear woman” disclosed the secret to the Omniscient Mother of how the “born and die babies” do their business, although she had already known all their secrets.

After the Mother had hesitated for a while, she turned her eyes to this woman. She remarked with great zeal: “Your own burden is a ‘male’ one which is difficult to take from you. Of course it is easy for me to let you have two ears, but I am not happy at all to do it because you have caused your mother and father to suffer a lot! You have deprived them of their property so much that both of them have become indigent persons! However, as I am courteous and I am not happy if I send one back without taking his or her burden away, I shall help you have two ears as the other people have!”

So after the Mother had remarked like that angrily, she told one of her dispensers to bring a strange garment from one of the racks. When the dispenser brought it we saw that it was completely woven out of root-hair and leaves of different kinds. Then she told the dispenser to spread it on this woman. And when he took it away from her body, she had got two ears, each was as normal as an ear should be.

Having seen two normal ears on the temples of her head, she jumped up with happiness. She danced and sang and praised the Mother greatly. But as she wanted to leave the Hall the Covenanter warned her greatly to desist completely from her “born and die baby” company otherwise she would become again a “one-ear woman” as before. Then she left the Hall with happiness. That was how the Witch-Herbalist or the Omniscient Mother of the Remote Town took away the burden of this woman.





The Man with Eight Burdens




Immediately that woman had left the Hall of Assembly with great joy, the Witch-Herbalist sat back with ease on her special carved large seat. This seat was well carved from different kinds of big roots. And it was beautifully polished with the juice of leaves and roots. Although it was very beautiful, it was extremely hideous for the burdensome people to look at it to their satisfaction.

Then she called loudly the surname of the next burdened man to come to the front of the altar. But it was a great pity that this man could not walk to the altar, because he was totally lame, the hump which was on his back or nape was as big as a mound. Again, there was a goitre on his neck which was just like a hillock. So both hump and goitre were a heavy load for him to lift himself up from the ground or floor. Not only that, big boils were all over his body and each was as big as the head of a child. His forehead was deeply dented so much that there was not any person who would like to look at it twice. Not only that, as well his nose was so compact that it was very hard for him to breathe in and out. So for this he had non-stop hiccups. More, he had one eye only, the other one had been totally blind for a number of years, and his body was also twisted.

And the only one eye of this man had swelled out as when a big snail moves out from its shell. And this meant he had eight kinds of serious burdens: he was lame, he had a hump, goitre, boils, dented forehead, compact nose, non-stop hiccups and a twisted body. But No. 9 burden which was “one eye” was ruled out from being “a serious burden” after the Omniscient Witch-Mother and her paramount chiefs and noble men and women had argued strongly with one another for a number of twinklings whether to count it to be the “No. 9 serious burden” for this man. So at last all of them agreed that as being blind in one eye was common among humans it should not be counted as “a serious burden”.

But when I fastened my eyes on this man for some twinklings with marvel and fear, then as usual, and as the Witch-Mother and her members were still arguing warmly about “No. 9 burden”, my two “minds” who were my partners, etc. began to argue with each other. The first “mind” said with wonder: “Can the Witch-Herbalist free this man from all of his burdens?” But the second “mind” did not hesitate to reply: “Yes, I believe the Witch-Herbalist will certainly take all of his burdens away!” But when my two “minds” had argued like that with wonder and stopped, it came to my “memory” at this time that: “So far as I or as one of the burdened people are concerned, my own burden would be very easy for the Mother to free me from it”, this means, to make my barren wife pregnant.

But this thought had hardly come to my “memory” and given me sound assurance when my first “mind” said: “Although the Mother will give you the juju-medicine or soup which will make your wife pregnant, you will not keep to the warning of the Mother and of her Covenanter. So this will make things difficult for you and your wife when you return to your town!” Again, the other one which was the second “mind” and which never deceived or confused me, added: “Even he and his wife will be sacrificed to the god of the river at last!” Again, the first “mind” supported the second “mind” at the same time: “Yes, both of them will be sacrificed to the god, but together with their property!” Again, the second “mind” made the first “mind” to understand that: “Although he and his wife and their property will be sacrificed to the god of the river, both of them will succeed at last, and then they will return to the town with honour and a newborn baby!”

But when both my “minds” had argued with each other like that, I was much embarrassed so that I nearly fainted because I did not understand their arguments yet at all, especially as they mentioned in their arguments that my wife and I would be sacrificed to the god of the river which was in my town.

However, when I became conscious, I continued to fasten my eyes on this horrible man with great horror. But when the Mother saw that all the burdens of his body were too heavy for him to walk or move to the altar by himself, she told four of her attendants to carry him to the front of the altar. When he had been carried to the front of the altar the Mother hesitated and looked at him with much surprise for more than five twinklings. After that she raised her head up and started to look at the ceiling of the hall for about ten twinklings before she dropped her head down again. But as I observed, her attitude showed that she had not seen such a burdened man, whose burdens were so many and terrible as those of this man, before.

But at last she asked from the lame, etc. man how he had managed to reach or come to the Remote Town. This Eight-Burden Man explained with hiccups that he had crawled from his faraway town to the Remote Town when he was informed that the Mother would take his burdens away unfailingly if he could get in touch with her. Then the Mother shook her head up and down, and she asked from him again how many years it took him to crawl to the Remote Town. The man explained with his usual hiccups that it took him more than eight years before he could crawl to the town.

When he explained like that, the Mother shook her head up and down again, and then she remarked strongly: “I have conceived many serious questions in my womb which I want to ask from you. When I deliver these questions, as when a woman delivers a baby, I want you to answer them to the hearing of everyone who is in this hall: Whose son are you? Are your father and mother rich or poor? What are their professions? Are they evil-doers? Are they doing evil works in the corner of their house?” Thus the Mother asked all these questions from this Eight-Burden Man.

But the lame, etc. man answered the questions: “I am the son of evil-doers and they are my father and mother. Both are not rich but poor. Every corner of their house is full of evil things. They had killed hundreds of people with their evil powers and they had also brought thousands of rich people of the town to a miserable state! Having seen these their evil works, the whole people of the town hate them. But as vengeance, after some years that they had started to do evil things, all of these burdens came upon me!” It was like that this lame, etc. man explained to the Witch-Mother with hiccups.

Then the Mother remarked loudly: “Yes, the son of the evil-doer must reap evils! All the evils which your father and mother had done to others have come upon you and they are your burdens now! However, as you have suffered for many years, I have mercy on you!”

Then the Omniscient Mother told one of her dispensers to bring one pitcher which contained the vegetable decoction and which was for washing off such burdens as that of this man. When the large pitcher was brought and the dispenser had put it down before the lame, etc. man, the Omniscient Witch-Mother instructed the dispenser to wash him with the vegetable decoction. Having done that, she told him to give the lame, etc. man some of the vegetable-water to drink. But to the greatest surprise of the other burdensome people who were still waiting for their turn, all the burdens of this man vanished immediately. He became a beautiful healthy gentleman in our presence.

So when he saw himself that he could walk, that he had no more hump, goitre, boils, dented forehead, compact nose, non-stop hiccups, nor twisted body, he jumped so high that his head nearly hit the ceiling of the hall. He was intoxicated with joy for many twinklings before he became conscious. Then he sang and danced for a few twinklings, and then he bowed low to the Omniscient Mother with laughter. But before he was told to go back to his town, the courteous Witch-Mother took his “No. 9 burden” away for him. After that, the Covenanter warned him seriously that he must not do any evil work in his life, otherwise his burdens would certainly relapse even more severely than before. But the Omniscient Witch-Mother hinted him that his father and mother who were evil-doers all their days, would die before he returned to his town. Then after the Mother had hinted him thus, the Covenanter told him to go back to his town, and then he left the Hall with great happiness which one could not describe.





It is My Turn Now




As soon as that man had left the Hall of Assembly or Temple, with the perfect healed body, the Witch-Herbalist or the Omniscient Mother of the Remote Town called my surname loudly and I answered loudly with fear, especially as I had been a “born and die baby” before. So without hesitation, I stood up from the seat and I went to the front of the altar.

I had hardly stood before her when she asked aloud: “What was your profession?” I replied at the same time: “I was a brave hunter of the wild bush animals before I left my town years ago!” Having answered that question aloud, she asked again: “What is the profession of your father?” I replied: “My father is the chief priest and pagan of gods, idols, spirits, etc!” “As your father is the chief priest and pagan, is he doing evil things after that?” the Mother asked solemnly. But I told her, “He does no evil things at all.”

After the Mother had asked all these questions from me and I had answered all, she asked again: “But what is your burden which has forced you to come to me?” So I explained to her, as I held the cruse with the left hand: “Since about five years from when I married, my wife has not conceived at all and that is the only burden which I bring to you!” But as the Mother wanted to say the next word, her deathless paramount chiefs, noble men and women mocked funnily at my father and the gods, idols, etc. of my town. They said with laughter: “But your burden which has cost you many years of journey to this town, is quite simple enough for your father, the chief priest and pagan and all the gods, idols, spirits, etc. of your town to make your wife pregnant!” But her paramount chiefs, etc. had hardly mocked at my father and the gods, idols, spirits, etc. when the Mother said with a sharp voice: “There is no need to mock his father and gods, idols, spirits, etc. of his town who had failed to make his wife pregnant, because, without the approval of God Almighty, people will fail in all attempts!”

But when the Mother had explained like that to them, she told me to give her the cruse which was in my left hand and I bowed low and gave it to her with both hands. Then she called one of her dispensers, she gave it to him and then instructed him to go and prepare the herbs and meat soup in it. But when the dispenser left for the large dispensary, she told me to go back to my seat and wait till the dispenser had finished. Then as soon as I had returned to my seat she called the next burdened person.

But as soon as she had finished with the next burdened person, the dispenser returned with my cruse and he gave it to the Mother. For he had put the cooked herbs, some pieces of meat and many other ingredients inside the cruse, and it was brim-full. The mouth of the cruse was carefully covered with its cover and then it was wrapped with a piece of white cloth so that the soup might not smell out into my nostrils. As the Witch-Herbalist or the Omniscient Mother held up the cruse with both hands, she called my name loudly. But as I walked to the altar and stood before her, she first remarked loudly:

“Snail bewails for having no feet.

“Buffalo bewails for not having enough hair on his body but only horns.

“Tiger bewails for having no mercy.

“Elephant bewails for having too heavy a body and teeth.

“But Hedgehog bewails for having no teeth in his mouth!”

It was like that the Mother first remarked loudly, and then she gave the cruse to her Covenanter. But as the Covenanter held up the cruse with both hands, all the Mother’s deathless paramount chiefs and noble men and women remarked again:

“One’s children are a stream of happiness for him or her! One without even an issue is one of the mourners! The most unfortunate person on earth may be the richest on earth. And many fortunate people say: ‘My child is my happiness, wealth, health, dresses, etc.’”

After the paramount chiefs and the noble men and women of the Omnipotent Mother had remarked loudly like that, and as soon as the “bird-like organist” of the Mother had attested to their remarks with the organ, then the Covenanter warned me seriously that I must not eat from the soup, even I must not let the smell of it reach my nose. Thus he warned me loudly and then he gave the cruse to me and I took it from him with happiness. But as the custom of the Remote Town was, I sang and danced for a few twinklings before I bowed for the Witch-Herbalist or the Omniscient and Omnipotent Mother of this Remote Town, her Covenanter, her deathless paramount chiefs and her noble men and women, while I waved my right hand to the “bird-like organist” of the Mother. And then I left the Hall of Assembly or the Temple of the Witch-Mother, that noon.





On My Way Back to My Town




Then as soon as I had left the Hall of Assembly or Temple of the Witch-Herbalist, the Omniscient Mother of the Remote Town, I started to travel along in the town as hastily as I could with great joy which could not be described. And when it was about the sixth hour of the evening, I travelled to the same gate of the Remote Town, and then I stopped. But to my surprise, I met the very gateman whom I met there when I was going into the town a year ago. I met the colt which the two little delicate fellows gave to me and which the three of us rode to the gate a year ago. The colt had already grown to be a very big and healthy horse now, and I was very surprised that it was still alive. I met also my heavy matchet, bags of food and juju, the bow and poisoned arrows, and the long two-headed spear on top of which the two “removable heads” were pierced. This good gateman had taken great care of them.

Without hesitation, the gateman surrendered the horse and the rest of my property to me. But as the night was near and as I saw that the darkness of the night would not allow me to continue my journey, then I became the guest of the gateman. And as soon as I sat in his beautiful booth, he prepared food and both of us ate together. After the repast both of us began to drink and discussed about the powerful Witch-Herbalist and the two little delicate fellows. He told me that these two fellows were the grandchildren of the Witch-Mother. Having discussed together about my town till midnight, both of us lay down and we slept.

Hardly in the morning had we woken, prepared breakfast and eaten it together, when I stood up and I began to collect my belongings together. As my colt had already grown to be a big horse, I needed a saddle and stirrup. But as I wanted to ask from the gateman where to get them, he brought both out from his booth. He gave them to me, and after I had used them for my horse, he told me that both saddle and stirrup had been left behind by a burdened man when he returned and found that his horse had died. So I thanked him greatly and then I fastened the cruse on my head with rope so that it might not fall down. After that I hung both my food and juju-bags on my left shoulder and also my bow and arrows. Then I held the spear and matchet with the right hand.

Then I mounted the horse, but as soon as I bade the gateman “goodbye” I started to ride the horse along the road with a joyful song and dance. It was like that I rode away from the gate of the Remote Town.

As I was riding along the road, I was singing loudly and joyfully, and my horse was also dancing here and there with great joy which it shared with me. I had hardly travelled about forty kilometres when I began to feel hunger. And it was not so long after I was eager to eat when I rode my horse to where the two delicate little fellows stood at the roadside. The place on which they stood was opposite their little beautiful house. Both were dressed neatly in the best of their dresses and they were waiting for me. But I was extremely surprised that they knew the exact day that I left the Remote Town of the Witch-Herbalist, and the exact twinkling that I would reach the place where I met them.

When I met them unexpectedly like that, they were waiting for my return. They stopped me with gladness and I dismounted from the horse with gladness as well. Then with a smile, they greeted me warmly and they paid great respect to me as if I were a king, and with a smile, I greeted them warmly in return. I was much surprised as well that they knew I was terribly hungry for food at this time, because as soon as they had paid great respect to me, they told me to follow them to their beautiful little house which was near there. So without fear and hesitation, I followed them, as my horse was following me behind without my holding its rein. As soon as we had walked gently to the front of their house, and as soon as I had put the cruse down gently and also the rest of my belongings, they opened the well-polished door of their house and then all of us entered, while my horse stood satisfactorily in the shadow of one of the strange beautiful trees which were in front of their house.

Without wasting a twinkling, they asked me to sit down on one of the beautiful chairs which they had already arranged round one big table. I had hardly sat on that chair when they too sat on the chairs which were at the second side of the beautiful table. When I sat at the table opposite these two delicate fellows, I perceived very delicious food and also the drinks which they had prepared and put ready on this table. I hesitated to eat but I began to look on with wonder for about two twinklings, though I was badly hungry for food and drinks at this time. But as soon as the damsel and her little delicate man observed that I had become conscious, they asked me to eat on. Then with greediness, I began to eat and they too started to eat along with me.

So as soon as they were quite sure that I had entirely satisfied my hunger, the beautiful and charming little damsel cleared the table except for the drinks. Having done that, she came back and sat back on her seat. Then the three of us started to drink. But when we had drunk for a few twinklings, they asked me whether the Witch-Herbalist who was their grandmother, had given me anything for my barren wife. So I explained to them that she had given me back the cruse which I had given to her, and that as I observed, the cruse contained cooked herbs, pieces of meat and many other kinds of ingredients, and that the Witch-Herbalist had told me that all would make my wife pregnant when she ate the soup.

Having explained to them like that, and as we were still enjoying the drinks, they asked me to tell them the history of my town. But when I told them how we were worshipping various kinds of gods, idols, spirit of the river, etc., both of them burst into a very lovely laughter. After they had laughed loudly for a few twinklings, and as I fastened my eyes on them, they asked me with pity why all the gods, etc. of my town could not make my barren wife pregnant. But when they asked this question from me, I dropped my head down heavily with shame for a few twinklings before I raised it up again. And then I explained to them that after the gods, etc. of my town and also my father had failed to make my wife pregnant, then I went to the Witch-Mother for help.

But they were very sad at last when I explained to them like that. So when we had drunk together for about one hundred and twenty twinklings, and they were sure that I was satisfied, they told me to stand up and I did so at the same time. When they had accompanied me to the front of their house, we stopped. They prayed for me and for my wife. After that I fastened the cruse of the soup on my head as usual. I tied on the back of my horse, the bag of my juju, the bag of food, although the food had already been exhausted for a long time, and I hung the bow and arrows on my left shoulder. I held the two-headed spear upright with the same left hand, while I held my heavy matchet with the right hand. Then I mounted the horse and held its rein with the same right hand.

Having done all this, instead of allowing me to go back to the road of the Remote Town and continue my journey from there, they told me with a lovely smile to follow them to the back of their beautiful little house. When we reached there, they showed me a very narow path on which they told me to ride my horse to my town. So immediately they bade me goodbye and waved their hands to me. I started to ride my horse along on this strange path. It was like that I left these two good little fellows and their beautiful little house.





I Ate from the Soup on the Way




But to my fear, when I had travelled far away on the strange narrow path from the house of the two little fellows, I looked back, but there was no path at all. It was only thick bush that I saw behind. Now I observed that the more I travelled on, the more this strange path closed up behind. Therefore, this gave me much embarrassment at last.

Although I was travelling on this path without any danger or difficulties, and without meeting any obstacles such as the churlish wild jungle people, to my surprise I did not see any village or town in order to stop there, to beg the inhabitants to give me something to eat. And to my disappointment, the edible fruits were very scarce in the bushes and wild jungles through which this strange path went. It was like that I continued to ride my horse along with an almost empty stomach, and with the two-headed spear on top of which the two “removable heads” were pierced, my heavy matchet and the rein of my horse on my right hand, while my juju-bag, food-bag etc. were tied on the back of the horse, and the cruse of soup was fastened onto my head.

When I had travelled for three days without seeing better things to eat than the little dried fruits which sometimes I found on the path, so at this time, my first “mind” advised me to stop and eat from the soup which was in the cruse. But my second “mind” hastily reminded me at this time that the Witch-Herbalist or the Omniscient Mother had warned me that I must not taste nor even smell the soup, but it was for my barren wife to eat the whole of it at a time. So I was greatly shocked when my second “mind” reminded me like that. However, without following the advice of the first “mind”, I did not stop to eat from the soup, but I continued to ride my horse along with hunger.

But it was a pity to say that when there remained less than two days to reach my town, which I had left for more than six years, I was so weary, tired and hungry for food that I could not ride along any more. And when I began to feel giddiness, I dismounted from my horse. As soon as I dismounted, I put the cruse down, and without following the advice of my second “mind” I removed the lid of the cruse and I ate from the soup to my entire satisfaction. After that I stretched myself on the ground and slept on that spot till the following morning.

Then as soon as I woke in the morning, I continued my journey with fear because I never knew what would happen to me because I had eaten from the soup.





I Returned to My Town At Last




Having travelled very fast for five hundred and forty twinklings, I came to the outskirts of my Rocky Town. Because the strange path was very short, I was confused whether it belonged to the two little fellows. Again, I wondered greatly that as soon as I had travelled to the outskirts of my town, my first “mind” and second “mind” which were my partners and advisers stopped advising me. However, my “memory” continued to help me. Moreover, I thanked my “Supreme Second” greatly immediately I rode to the outskirts for guiding me throughout my journey, though he was totally invisible to me. Then after a while, I rode my horse from the outskirts to the town when it was exactly one-third of the day.

I continued to ride the horse along in the town with the two-headed spear on top of which the two “removable heads” were pierced. And I held the spear above my head, the cruse of the soup was fastened on my head, my juju-bag, food-bag and bow and poisoned arrows were on my left shoulder. And my heavy matchet was on my right hand with the rein of the horse. And also I was with but rags on my body. The people of the town saw me and they were following me with great wonder and fear as I was riding the horse to my father’s house. All of them were following me with panic as they were greeting me repeatedly and loudly: “Ha! welcome! welcome! You return to us again like a hero!”

When there remained about two hundred metres to reach my father’s house, he and my mother and my wife heard the noises which these people were making as if they were in great panic. So the three of them ran with fear to the front of the house just to see what was happening in the town. But they were exceedingly happy when they saw me in front of the crowd of people. And without hesitation, the three of them ran to me and they embraced me with happiness until I rode the horse to the front of the house.

As soon as I rode to the front of the house, I dismounted, I bowed for the people, my father, mother and my wife. Then I pegged the spear on the ground in front of the house, while the “removable heads” on top of it faced the crowd of people terribly. Having pegged it on the ground, I fastened the horse to it. Then I greeted these people again with great laughter, and then I walked into the house with the rest of my belongings.

When I walked into the house joyfully, I walked direct to the room of my barren wife and I put all these things there. But I had hardly done so when my father and mother told me to follow them to the shrine of their gods. And I followed them without sitting down, because as it was forbidden for me to sit again when we returned from the shrine the day that I was leaving for the Remote Town, so it was forbidden for me to sit without going back to the shrine and thanking the gods first when I returned. So when all of us together with the crowd of people came to the shrine which was at the bank of the river near the “god of the state”, only my father, mother, wife and I entered the shrine, while the crowd of people stood at the outside. Then my father and mother asked me to kneel down before their gods. When I did so, they sacrificed one cock, one hen, kola-nuts and drinks to the gods and they thanked the gods for letting me return to them safely. They also thanked my “Supreme Second” greatly for guiding me throughout my journey.

When all of us had danced in front of the gods for a few twinklings, then we returned to the house, but the other people returned to their own houses. As soon as we returned to the house, and in the presence of my father and mother, I told my wife to eat the remaining soup which was inside the cruse. Having eaten it, I told her that the Witch-Herbalist or the Omniscient Mother of the Remote Town told me that she would conceive unfailingly within two months eating it. So she was very happy when I told her that. Having eaten this wonderful soup, she and my mother gave me food and I ate it immediately to my satisfaction.

Then when it was about the sixth hour of the evening, the people of the town gathered in front of my father’s house. Many of them sat in circles and so many stood round the last outward circle. Then merriment began as soon as my father, mother and my wife supplied them with all kinds of drinks. After a while, they began to beat the drums, sing loudly and dance. Having done so till midnight, they told me to tell them the story of my journey to the Remote Town. So I stood in the centre of the last inward circle. I told them all my difficulties, etc. before I reached there, and I told them as well how the Witch-Mother was very kind to the people who brought their burdens to her.

When these people asked from me who were my partners or with whom I went to the Remote Town, I explained to them that my first “mind”, second “mind”, my “memory” and also my “Supreme Second” were my partners and advisers. But they were very surprised when they heard that my first “mind”, second “mind” and my “memory” were my partners and advisers. I told the people further that my “Supreme Second”, who was entirely invisible, was my guard throughout my journey.

As soon as I had told the people the story of my journey to the end, the people were greatly shocked when they heard the difficulties, etc. which I endured. However, after they had kept quiet with grievance for some twinklings, they continued to beat the drums, sing loudly and dance, as they were drinking the palm-wine and many other kinds of drinks continuously. And they did so till daybreak. But when it was the seventh hour of the morning, the whole of us danced to every part of the Rocky Town and we danced back to my father’s house again. After that the people went back to their houses. Then my father, mother, wife and I entered the house. It was like that I told the people that I had no fellow-travellers but my first “mind”, second “mind”, my “memory” and also my “Supreme Second” who was my guard. But as I was tired I lay down on my bed and then I slept, as soon as we entered the house. And it was my wife’s father who woke me up when it was the sixth hour of the evening.

When he woke me up, he thanked me greatly for the hardships, punishments, etc. which I endured on my journey in respect of his daughter who was my wife.

Then the following day, I started to enjoy the normal life with my people and the people of the town, as well as before I went to the Witch-Herbalist of the Remote Town. I continued to kill both small and wild bush animals as before. But the people of the town were much surprised and fearful whenever they raised their heads up and looked at the strange “removable heads” which were on top of the two-headed spear. They were also confused greatly, especially as the two heads seemed as if they wanted to talk to them. They were also afraid to see this spear itself because they knew that it belonged to the devil only. And they were much surprised as to how I managed to take it from the devil. But when I told them how I fought with the hideous devil-worshipper and his followers on my way to the Remote Town, they knew that I was brave and strong indeed, and they knew as well that to go and return safely from the Remote Town was not easy at all.





Wife and Husband Conceived




In fact, as the Witch-Herbalist or the Omniscient Mother had told me that my barren wife would conceive within two months of eating the soup, I was so much surprised that she conceived unfailingly within two months of eating the wonderful soup. But my great sadness again was that I as her husband conceived as well. As the belly of my wife was swelling up every day, it was so my own belly was swelling out as well.

As I was extremely happy that my wife to whom I had been married for the past fifteen years had conceived at last, it was so I was extremely sad because it was revealed to me now that I had conceived like a woman. I was so sad and embarrassed at this time that I could not sleep by both day and night, but I was thinking only about this my misfortune. When it was five months after my wife had conceived, the people of my town, as they loved me, my father, mother and my wife’s father, were very happy to see my wife in this state. But they were confused at the same time when they saw my own belly which had swelled out like that of my wife.

At first they thought that it was sickness which had caused my belly to swell out. But as for myself, I knew quite well that it was pregnancy for I had eaten from the soup which had made my wife pregnant. Although the Witch-Herbalist, her Covenanter, noble men and women and her paramount chiefs had warned me seriously not to eat from that wonderful soup, nor even to smell it at all, alas! hunger and giddiness forced me to eat from it on my way returning to my town.

But when it was the seventh month that my wife and I had conceived together, the whole people of the town, my father, mother and my wife’s father knew very well that my belly which had swelled out was pregnancy and not sickness. Now my father, mother, my wife and her father became sad, while the rest of the people in the town began to make mockery of me, though they loved me. They were saying with laughter: “This is the first time we see that the wife and her husband have conceived together! But we shall wait and see how the husband will deliver his own pregnancy.”

Now, at this stage, I could not go out any more because I was ashamed of my pregnancy. But when it was the eighth month since my wife and I had conceived, my belly had swelled out so much that it nearly touched the ground. I could not go to the bush and jungle to hunt as before. Even it was very hard for me at this time to stand up from the seat and walk to a short distance.

Having seen that I as a man had conceived like a woman, the whole of the oldest people of the town invited my mother, father, and my wife’s father to the state hall. They told my father who was their chief priest and pagan of the gods, etc. and my wife’s father who was the progenitor, that as it was contrary for a man to conceive like a woman and that it was very bad luck for the other people in the town when a man like my father’s son conceived. These oldest people said further that in order to bring peace to the town they would sacrifice me and my wife and all of our property to the god of the river within a few days.

But when these oldest people told my father, mother and my wife’s father like that, the three of them began to beg from that midnight till daybreak, but the oldest people did not agree at all. All of them insisted that my wife and I together with our property must be sacrificed to the god of the river so that peace might come to the town.

However, when my father, mother and my wife’s father had failed totally in all their pleadings at the second midnight, then with great anger and sadness they left the oldest people in the hall and they came back to the house before daybreak. So when they returned to the house they told my wife and me with tears that the oldest people were going to sacrifice the two of us to the god of the river because I had conceived like a woman. Having explained to us like that, I simply shrugged with a smile, but my wife began to weep bitterly at the same time. Thus my father, mother and my wife with her father continued to weep bitterly until the day was reached when the oldest people announced round the town that my wife and I together with our property would be sacrificed to the god of the river the following morning so that peace might come to the town.

But before the day was reached a special big canoe had been made and was put ready at the bank of the river opposite the platform on which the “god of state” stood. Then when the day was reached, it was hardly the seventh hour of the morning when the oldest people came to my father’s house. They knocked at the door heavily and the door had hardly been opened for them by my father when they rushed into the house. Then they packed all my property and my wife’s property as well. After that they told me and my wife to come out. When we did so, they told us that both of us must dance round the town first before we would be sacrificed to the god of the river. Having heard so, with bravery, I took the two-headed spear of the devil on top of which I had pierced the two “removable heads”, I held the spear with the left hand and I put my usual bow and poisoned arrows on the left shoulder and I held my usual heavy matchet with the right hand.

Then as I held both matchet and the spear in a fearful way, some of them carried the rest of our property while one of them held the rein of my horse. Having done so, the rest of them started to beat the drums and sing the song of the god of the river mournfully. Then they told both of us to dance along their front. It was so both of us began to dance about in the town as my father, mother and my wife’s father, who had become morbid at this time, were following us with tears. After a while uncountable common people gathered and were following us, as they were shouting repeatedly on us as if we were thieves. Though my wife continued to weep bitterly, I continued to smile.

As soon as we had danced to everywhere in the town, then they led us to the bank of the river when it was about the tenth hour of the morning. Then at the bank of the river they told us to dance round the “god of state” first. Having done that, they first put all our property in the big canoe and also my horse. After that, they put two oars in the canoe. Then they dressed each of us with very costly clothes, they put costly coral beads on our necks, ankles and wrists. After that they made various kinds of terrible ornaments on my face with white and red paint, and they did the same thing on my wife’s face. These ornaments were so hideous that they frightened every kind of living creature. Having done all that for us, then they slaughtered many rams, goats and fowls and they poured their blood on our heads. After this, they put a very huge and ugly cap which had two flaps on my head, while they wound round the head of my wife with a very costly large head-tie.

Having done so for both of us before the rest of the people of the town, they cooked all the slaughtered animals. So as they started to eat them the drummers began to beat the drums. Then having eaten the whole animals, they drank the strong drinks to their entire satisfaction. After that they stood up, they began to sing the song of the god of the river as they were deadly intoxicated by the strong drinks. When they had sung and danced for a while, they told both of us to enter the canoe. So willing or not we entered it, as the spear was on my left hand and my matchet on the right hand, while my bow and arrows were on my left shoulder.

When we entered the canoe, they told me to sit on a high carved chair and they told my wife to sit on another one which was near my own. These carved chairs were not far from my horse and our property. But as they were making this arrangement, I was not afraid at all, I was just smiling to the crowds who crowded the bank of the river and were jeering at us. Although my father, mother, my wife and her father were weeping louder at this time, I assured them that the more I conquered the Crazy Removable-Headed Wild Man, the Abnormal Squatting Man, the Long-Breasted Woman of the Mountain, the Hideous Devil-Worshipper and his followers, etc., when I went to the Remote Town, so it was certain that I would conquer whomsoever I might meet in this my second journey. And I had a strong belief that I would return to the town safely with my wife, though there was none of the people who had been sacrificed to the god of the river who had returned. It was like that I assured my father, mother and my father-in-law this morning.

After they had danced here and there at the bank of the river for many twinklings, both old and young people began to beg the god of the river to accept my wife and myself and also our property as his sacrifice, and that he should have mercy on them and not allow bad luck to come to the town. Having shouted like that on us for a few twinklings, some of the strong men were told by the oldest people to push the canoe on to the middle of the river. So as soon as they had pushed it to the middle of the river, they returned to the bank of the river. But as the strong tides were pushing the canoe slowly along toward the south of the town, my father, mother, my father-in-law, and my wife who was with me in the canoe, continued to weep louder than ever, as every one of the rest of the people was then snapping the fingers above his or her head and was saying greedily: “Oh! my head, let these two unfortunate persons carry my death, bad luck, sickness, sorrow, etc. away to the god of the river!”

Thus the oldest people, middle-aged people, young people and children were saying repeatedly and loudly, as the tides were carrying the canoe along on the river. But at this time I was just waving hands to the people with smiles, though my wife continued to weep. After a while, the tides pushed the canoe to such a distance that the people could not see us any more. So they danced back to the town. That was how my wife and I were sacrificed to the god of the river, because I conceived like a woman.





Under the River




But as soon as our canoe was lost to the view of the people, and as my wife continued to weep bitterly, I started to row the canoe with the oars as quickly as I could so that I might row far away before darkness would come to cover the surface of the water. Thus I continued to row on and on as I was singing the song of the hunter loudly and joyfully without stopping. But when it was the first hour of the morning, something horrible happened which forced my wife to stop weeping and which stopped me also unexpectedly from rowing the canoe further.

First, my horse neighed so loudly and fearfully three times that my wife and I were startled with great fear unexpectedly. Again, the horse had hardly stopped its horrible neigh when a very bright light came from the bottom of the river onto the top of the fast flowing water suddenly, and our canoe was in the middle of this very bright light. Now my wife and I knew that the time had come when the god of the river to whom we were sacrificed would come to take us away as his sacrifice.

But as soon as we saw this second sign again, I hastily set my bow in action and then I stood ready to fight. It came to my “memory” at this moment that the kind of adventure which I liked always would soon come. But my first and second “minds” had already deserted me as soon we saw these two signs. So there were no partners who could advise me now, whether to fight or not. However I had got myself ready to fight with whomsoever might come to take my wife and me away. But I had hardly got my bow ready when there appeared on top of the water unexpectedly one old man, one old woman and many strong soldiers, with various kinds of fighting weapons on their hands, and all of them followed the old man and old woman.

As soon as both of us saw their appearance, which was not exactly that of a fish or a beast or a human being or a bird or a snake, etc., the fear overwhelmed both of us so much that we nearly fainted at the same time. But as they were walking on top of the water toward us, my wife was so much afraid that she fell down in the canoe unconscious. And it was now I knew that the old man was the god and the old woman was the goddess of the river.

Although the god and goddess of the river were so stern and terrible, I did not fear at all to fight them. Instead I began to shoot at them and their soldiers with my bow. But there was none of my poisoned arrows which hit any of them. Having seen that I was determined to fight them probably to death, their soldiers did not waste time in retaliating. As I continued to shoot at them, they too began to shoot at me continuously.

After a few sixtieths of a twinkling, my arrows forced them to move back to a little distance from their soldiers, and they kept watching the fight without talking to one another. But as I began to dodge here and there so that their bullets might not hit me, they too were dodging here and there in order to avoid my arrows. My canoe began to turn round, and after a few twinklings one of their bullets hit my horse. And as it was not hitched to a part of the canoe, it fell heavily in the canoe and then the canoe was bent heavily to one side. So at this time, the water had nearly run into it although it was capacious. Having seen this, it came to my “memory” that my wife and I were going to perish in the water soon.

However, as my canoe wanted to sink and my horse had been shot, this gave me more power to shoot at the soldiers of the god and goddess of the river faster than ever. But they continued to shoot at me, though none of their so-called bullets hit me. And I was shooting at them continuously, and none of my arrows hit them either. But as the fierce fight continued, my poisoned arrows finished unexpectedly. Again, without hesitation, it came to my “memory” to pick up the two-headed spear from the bottom of the canoe and to use it as a fighting weapon for the soldiers. So I hastily picked it up, but I wanted to remove the two heads from the top of the spear first and then to continue to fight with the soldiers with it. The god and goddess saw the heads and both of them were startled at the same time. They were so fearful when they saw these two “removable heads” that they hastily commanded their soldiers with hands and horrible voice to stop shooting at me.

So as I noticed that the heads frightened them, I left both on top of the spear. But at this time, I had not yet understood whether it was the two strange heads which frightened them or the two-headed spear of the devil. But it was hardly a sixtieth of a twinkling since their soldiers stopped shooting at me when a very strong hurricane began and a very strong wave rose high to the sky on the spot of this fighting field of water. And as soon as the hurricane started to turn my canoe round, it wanted to sink it. The bright light disappeared suddenly. But the light had hardly disappeared when the strong wave fell heavily onto my canoe. Then it sank my canoe together with my wife who was still unconscious, and also our property. But to my fear, within one sixtieth of a twinkling we were in front of one beautiful mighty building which was in a beautiful town which was under that river.

As I stood up in the canoe holding the spear, and as I was still wondering how we came there and why we were not wet and my canoe, etc. were not wet as well with water, the god and goddess walked out from the mighty building to the outside. When they came nearer to the canoe, they bowed for me and for the two heads with great respect. After that they told me with smiling faces to come down from the canoe. So when I noticed that they were not hostile to us, I pulled my wife up and I held her as I still held the spear and then we came down.

When we came down they told two of their bearers to treat my horse, and after that they should take it to the nearby pasture. Having told their bearers what to do, then they led us into their mighty building. After a while they led us to their sitting-room. Then they asked us to sit on one beautiful two-seater chair. And after they bowed for us with great respect again as if we were a king. They sat on another two-seater chair which was opposite the one on which we sat. Having received us with respect like that they told their bearers to go away. And within a few twinklings very delicious food was brought to us and to them as well.

But as my wife and I were very hungry for food at this moment, so we ate the whole food within a few twinklings. Then after we had satisfied our hunger, many kinds of drinks were brought to us and to them as well. But as my wife could not drink, I started to enjoy the drinks as much as the god and goddess were enjoying their own. As soon as we had started to enjoy the drinks, the god began to introduce himself and the goddess to me thus: “I am the god of the river who your people in your town are worshipping, and to whom your people are sacrificing many things in which human beings are included. I am the king, and the goddess who is my wife,” he pointed hand to her, “is the queen of this town. We live comfortably in this town. Although the people of many towns sacrifice human beings, whom they dislike, to us, alas! we don’t kill or eat human beings but we keep them safe and we use them as servants. We have the power to come to any town, banks of river etc. at any time. We are kind to human beings sometimes, and we are hostile to them sometimes. We do this because they are cruel to one another sometimes. My wife, the goddess, has the power to give children to barren women. But she does not give sometimes when the people are cruel to one another.” Thus the god introduced themselves to me as his wife, the goddess, looked on.

Then as we were still drinking on, the god asked me to tell them something about myself, and I told them in brief thus: “Yes,” I sipped some of the drink which was in my hand, “before my wife and myself and all our property were sacrificed, I was a brave hunter of the wild beasts. Several years after I had married my wife, she was not pregnant. I went to the Witch-Herbalist in order that she should help me make the medicine that which would make my wife pregnant. The Witch-Mother was so kind that she gave me a juju-soup from which I ate on my way returning to my town, although the Witch-Mother warned me seriously not to eat from the witch-soup. When my wife ate the remaining soup she conceived. But unfortunately, as the belly of my wife has begun to swell up, so my own belly has begun to swell up. So after a few months that my wife and I had conceived, the people in the town saw that I as a man had conceived. Then in order to drive away the bad luck from the town, they sacrificed both of us and our property to both of you!” Thus I explained to both of them in brief.

Both of them kept quiet with wonder for a while. Then the goddess started to ask question from me thus: “Whose son are you in your town?” I answered, as the god looked on: “I am the son of the Chief Priest and Pagan. My father with his assistant used to perform the sacrificial ceremonies for the people of the town!” Thus I explained to her. “Whose daughter is your wife?” the goddess asked. “She is the daughter of the Progenitor who assists my father to perform the sacrificial ceremonies, and he is a close friend of my father as well.” It was so I explained to her. But when both of them heard that I was the son of the Chief Priest and Pagan and that my wife was the daughter of the Progenitor, they shook their heads to left and right and then said: “Thou shall not sacrifice the children of the god of the river to the god of the river! It is forbidden! The people of your town were wrong to sacrifice both of you to us!” But when the goddess and god blamed the people of my town for sacrificing us to them, I stood up, I exposed to them my belly which had so swelled that it nearly touched the floor. Then I explained to them that the people of my town sacrificed us to them so that peace and good luck might come to the town, therefore, as I thought, they were not to be blamed so much. Then I sat back on the chair. Of course they were not satisfied with my explanations.

As they were asking questions from me which I was answering carefully, my wife could not raise her head up and look at them because they were too stern and terrible for her. But as for me, their fearful appearances were nothing to me, because I had seen many terrible things when I went to the Remote Town. Again, the goddess asked me: “How did you manage to get these two heads,” she pointed her finger to them “which are on the top of the spear of the devil?” So I explained to her: “When I was going to the Remote Town, I fought with the ‘Crazy Removable-Headed Wild Man of the Jungle’ and I took the heads from him.” But when I told them how I got the heads, the goddess and the god kept quiet as they fastened their eyes on the heads with wonder and fear for many twinklings.

Then as soon as they took their eyes away from the heads, the god and goddess stood up; they told my wife and me to follow them to the houses in which all the people who had been sacrificed to them lived comfortably. But as soon as we entered one of the houses with the god and goddess, the people ran to me, they embraced me with happiness. They recognized my wife as well. Their appearance showed that they were not punished and that they were well cared for. Though these people knew that both of us were sacrificed as well to the god and goddess, they wondered to see that the god and goddess paid much respect to us. But they wondered and were confused when they saw that I had conceived like a woman. However every one of them asked me whether his wife, children, mother, father, friends, etc. were still alive. I assured every one of them that their people were still alive and in good health, but they still mourned their absence. After the god and goddess had taken us to all the houses, they led us back to the sitting-room as I held the spear.

But when we had sat and drunk for some twinklings, I told the god that my wife and I wanted to wash away all the rotten blood which the people of my town had poured on our heads and body the day that they sacrificed us to the god of the river. So the god led us to their bathroom. After we had washed all the rotten blood away from our bodies, we came back to the sitting-room. Again, the goddess led us to one beautiful room, she gave us fine garments. So we took our dirty clothes away from our bodies and then we wore those which the goddess gave to us. After that we returned to the sitting-room and we had hardly sat when I continued to drink the hot drink.

After a while, the goddess asked from me politely: “Will you please give us these two ‘Removable Heads’? I promise, if you give them to us, we shall treat your swelled-up belly so that it becomes as normal as before. In addition, we shall not detain you and your wife but we will send both of you back to your town, though the children of the god and goddess must not be sacrificed to the god and goddess of the river.” But when the goddess asked me to give them the heads, I told her and her husband, the god, to give me some time to think well whether I would be able to give the heads to them.

Now, my wife was happy once she had heard that they would send us back to our town if I could give them the heads. She knew now that they were greatly interested in these two heads. And it was at this time that she could look at their stern and terrible appearance.

So after we took supper, then the goddess led us to that beautiful room and then we slept there comfortably till the following morning. In the morning, a very nice breakfast was served to us, and after that the god told us to come to the sitting-room. Again, as soon as we started to drink the hot drinks, the goddess asked from me whether I was ready to give them the heads.

So I promised them that I would give them the heads provided they would treat my swelled-up belly, release all of the people of my town and allow me to take them back to my town, and allow my wife and me to stay with the god and goddess till my wife had delivered. When they agreed to all of my requests, then I gave them the two heads. But they told me that they were going to worship them, when I asked them what they were going to do with them. Now there remained with me only the two-headed spear of the devil. And as soon as I gave them the heads, my first “mind” and second “mind” reminded me that when I had wanted to throw them away as I was going to the Remote Town, they told me that I must not throw them away because they would be helpful to me when I returned to my town, thus my two “minds” reminded me.

Then with gladness the god started to treat my swelled-up belly. The kind of the treatment was that he struck my belly three times with a heavy club of bone every morning. It was like that he did for many days until my pregnancy disappeared entirely. But a few days after my pregnancy had disappeared, my wife was delivered of a male child. So with happiness, the god and goddess took great care of her and the baby for the period of three months.

Then when we had enjoyed ourselves for that period, one morning, the god and goddess invited the whole of the people who had been sacrificed to them before us to their house. They told them that they were free to go back to their town that morning. They told them further that every one of them should go back to his or her town with the very canoe with which he or she was sacrificed to them.

So these people, having heard so, were so happy that they began to jump up, they danced and sang here and there. But they never knew how they could reach the town, whether they were going to trek or fly or swim, they never knew at all. However when they had danced and sung joyfully for some twinklings, the god and goddess told them that each of them should enter his or her canoe with which he or she was sacrificed to them. And as their canoes were near the houses in which they were living, every one of them entered his or her own canoe with happiness.

As soon as those people had entered their canoes, the god told some of his bearers to bring my horse from the pasture into my canoe. But I wondered that the part of its body which the shot hit had been healed. After the horse had been guided into the canoe, the god and goddess told both of us to enter the canoe. So my wife entered it first with happiness as her new baby was on her back, and then I too entered as I held the two-headed spear. After that the god commanded the whole of his bearers to push the canoe onto the small stream which was near their mighty building. Having done that, he commanded the bearers again to push the canoes of the rest of the people onto the same stream.

Having pushed the whole of the canoes onto the stream, then the god and goddess told me to warn the old people of my town to stop sacrificing human beings to them as from that month. Then after the god had blessed every one of us, he and the goddess bade us goodbye and then went back to their mighty building as soon as we were lost to their view. So it was like that I ransomed the whole of these people, my wife and myself with the two “removable heads” which I had brought together with the two-headed spear of the devil, etc. to my town as trophies when I went to the Remote Town. So as my canoe was in front, I became the pilot of the rest of the people and they were following me. But to our surprise, we had not rowed our canoes for more than sixty twinklings when we came to the river of our town unexpectedly. It was on the banks of this river that all the shrines of gods, idols, etc. were built. It was on these banks that the “god of the state” was erected as well. Even we were confused when we reached this river which belonged to our town. But we were very happy when we saw the “god of the state” standing at the bank. Having seen the god standing on its high platform, then we believed that we had reached our town.

We had hardly stopped our canoes and fastened their ropes onto the beautiful trees which lined the banks of the river, when everybody began to pack his or her property from the canoe onto the bank of the river.





People Thought that

We were Deads




So without hesitation, every one of us put his or her property on his or her head, and as I held the rope of my horse with the left hand, my bow and many other things were hung on my left shoulder. I held the spear with the right hand. Then my wife with her new baby on her back and the rest of the people followed me. We started to go to the town as we began to sing loudly and joyfully. And when we sang loudly to the town, the people in the town ran from their houses to the front of their houses just to see what was happening.

But the majority of these people were so fearful and confused as soon as they saw us that they shouted unexpectedly with horror: “Ah! these people had been sacrificed to the god of the river, therefore they are deads!” Then they fled into the bush with fear. However the other people went to their houses with gladness and I went to my father’s house with my wife. But my father and mother were also shocked when they saw us. But they were exceedingly happy when I explained to them that the god and goddess of the river had released my wife, myself and the other people who had been sacrificed before the two of us when I gave them the two strange “removable heads”. And I explained to them further that my pregnancy disappeared a few days after the god started to strike my belly with a strange club of bone.

Having explained to my father and mother like that, both were very surprised. But when my mother took our new baby from my wife and started to feed it with happiness, my father ran to his friend’s house, who was the Progenitor and my father-in-law. He told him that my wife who was his daughter and I had returned to the town together with the whole people who had been sacrificed to the god of the river several years ago. But my father had hardly left for his friend’s house when my first “mind” and second “mind” reminded me: “One day, when you were going to the Remote Town we hinted you that, though you would return from the Remote Town to your town safely, you would be sacrificed to the god of the river a few months after you returned, but that later, you would return to your town with a new-born baby! So as we have been your partners who have given you useful advice throughout your journeys, we are now going back to take up our usual normal duties in your body. We wish you good luck and prosperity in all your undertakings! Goodbye!” It was like that my first “mind” and second “mind” said. But before they went back to take up their usual duties, I hastily thanked them thus: “I thank you greatly as well for your help and the useful advice which you gave me throughout my first and second journeys. Although you deserted me sometimes when I was in danger, that did not affect me so much for my “memory” remained with me and served me each time that you deserted me. But I think your desertion and misadvice may be brought to the judgment by my ‘memory’ sooner or later, for he recorded down all your behaviour throughout the journeys! Goodbye till then!” Thus I replied to my first “mind” and second “mind”.

But as soon as my first “mind” and second “mind” had gone back to perform their usual normal duties in my body, my father and his friend the Progenitor who was my father-in-law came with my father to see us with his own eyes, because it was unusual that one who had been sacrificed to the god of the river ever returned. So when he came with my father and saw me and his daughter, my wife, with her new baby, yet he still did not believe his eyes but had to make sure that we were not deads. He bent down, he took a handful of sand from the ground and then threw it on both of us. But when he saw that we did not disappear, he believed that we were not wraiths or deads. And then he was exceedingly happy. He was so happy that he began to flatter the god and goddess of the river as he was dancing round us.

After he had danced and flattered the god and goddess of the river for a few twinklings, he and my father went to the nearby bush. They called the people who had fled into the bush back, and as my father was the Chief Priest and Pagan and as my father-in-law was the Progenitor, the people respected them and they returned to their houses but with fear.

Then the following morning at about one-third of the day, I invited the whole people of the town to the state hall. And without wasting any time, the people rushed to the hall and as thousands sat on chairs, it was so thousands stood and thus thousands bent down to see what was going to happen. Those who were too old to walk told their people to carry them to the hall because they too wanted to hear the outcome of my journeys.

Having seen that the whole people of the town including children had gathered in the hall, I sat on a high chair and I put all the trophies, such as the two-headed spear of the devil, etc. on the long table which was in front of me. But when I noticed that the people had kept quiet and that they were now expecting to hear something from me, then I first addressed the old people as the custom of the Rocky Town was. Thus as soon as I climbed the long table: “You my people of the Rocky Town, I greet you all! Your night will prosper more than your morning! I pay my utmost respect to every one of the old people, young and children, for accepting my invitation, though I am too young to do so. I bow low for you all! Because when the head of the unicorn touches the ground, the horns will sprout from its head. When the pinnacle of the okro-plant touches the ground, the okro on it will become over-ripe, and when the pinnacle of the garden-egg plant touches the ground, its leaves turn to red as red blood. Therefore, I, the hunter of the wild beasts of this Rocky Town, bow with all my utmost respect for you all the people of the Rocky Town today!” So the whole people applauded me greatly when I first adressed them like that.

Then as soon as the people became quiet, I continued to address them: “Now, as every one of you knows, I returned from the Remote Town about eleven months ago with some trophies, among of which were the two strange ‘removable heads’. But as I conceived like a woman, you the people conspired together and then sacrificed both my wife and me together with our property to the god of the river. However, as I was brave enough to go anywhere, I fought gallantly with the soldiers of the god and goddess until my wife, myself, horse, canoe and other property were swallowed by the water together with the soldiers, god and goddess.

“To our fear, we found ourselves in a very beautiful town which was under the river. The god and goddess together stood before us in front of their beautiful mansion. But when they saw the two heads in my hand, they were so interested in them that they began to treat us with kindness. So for these two heads they released my wife, myself, and the whole people who had been sacrificed to them before the two of us. Again, they told me to warn the old people of the town that they should stop sacrificing human beings to them. They said that they do not kill or eat human beings. So we are not deads, but the god and goddess released us!” It was like that I explained to the people. But once they had heard that there was to be no more human sacrifice, they shouted greatly with joy which could not be described. After that they apologized for sacrificing my wife and me to the god.

Then they went out from the hall to the town, and great merriment began in every part of the town and it lasted for seven days. But it ended in front of my father’s house in order to show that I was the hero who had put a stop to the human sacrifice.





My “Memory” Sued My First “Mind” and Second “Mind”




But as the old people did not follow the young people when they left the hall for the town, so they waited until they went far away. Then they told me to kneel down and I did so. After they blessed me then they went out. But as there remained me alone in the hall, so I started to pack the trophies which I showed to the people so that they might believe my story. Then I felt unexpectedly that many things stood up in my skull and chest. A few sixtieths of a twinkling later, I saw that something like thick grey smoke rushed out from my nostrils to the outside, and it went direct to one chair which was at a little distance from my left. But as soon as that smoke reached the chair, it became like a solid white thing. When it sat on that chair which was near a table, I noticed this thing that it was in a form which did not actually resemble that of a man. I felt in my head now that there was nothing in the skull. But as soon as I had seen this strange thing, I became so weak that I could not go out of the hall as I had been preparing to do, but I sat back on the high chair on which I sat before.

As I was still wondering about this incident, I noticed that another thick grey smoke rushed out from my nostrils unexpectedly. As soon as it rushed out, it went direct to the two-seater bench which was at a distance of ten metres from me. As soon as the grey smoke rushed to the bench it divided into two. It had hardly divided into two when each was turned to a solid thing. But as soon as each sat on that bench, it turned to a figure which did not actually resemble that of a man. Both of them sat closely to each other, and they so resembled each other that there was nobody who could identify one from the other. Again, I felt in my chest that something had gone out of it.

But as I still fastened my eyes on these three grey figures who had become living things, I saw another thick grey smoke which emerged gradually from my shadow which was thrown on the floor by a sunbeam. And as soon as it emerged from my shadow, it became the solid form which was not actually the form of a man. Then he walked to the place that I sat. He took one of the chairs, he put it a few metres away on the right of the circle. Again, he put one table before the chair. Then before he sat on that chair, he put one big hand-bag which he brought with him, on the table.

But as I fastened my eyes on him with fear and confusion, he opened his hand-bag. He brought out from it many white sheets of flat shell, he put them on the table. Again, he brought two round short shells from the same bag. One was blue and the other one was red. Both resembled lead-pencils. But as soon as he had put the red one on the table, he held the blue one, he took one sheet of the white flat shell and put it in front of him. Then he posed himself as if he was a judge, and as soon as he raised his head up he looked at the two grey figures who sat together on one short bench. Both were those thick grey smokes which had rushed to the outside from my chest.

Having looked at them without talking to them, he took his eyes away but he directed them to the one who rushed out from my skull in the form of thick grey smoke and sat on one of the chairs. Then he said loudly: “Yes, Mr ‘Memory’, what are your accusations against Mr First ‘Mind’?” Then when the thick grey figure which was my “memory” stood up, he first bowed for the deceptive judge which was my “kidney” and he explained to him with a sad voice: “Yes, Judge ‘Kidney’, my accusations against Mr First ‘Mind’ are that when we were with our Possessor,” my “memory” called me their possessor, “as his partners and advisers, while he went and returned safely on his two dangerous journeys, Mr First ‘Mind’ misled our Possessor several times, which nearly ran our Possessor to death. But if I were not with him, and also Mr Second ‘Mind’, our Possessor would have perished in the wild jungles or when he and his wife were sacrificed to the god of the river. So for this reason, Mr First ‘Mind’ must be severely punished even to death!” Thus Mr “Memory” explained to the deceptive Judge “Kidney” and then he bowed and sat back.

Then with the blue shell lead-pencil which the Judge held, he wrote the whole accusations of Mr “Memory” on many of the white flat sheets of shell which were on the table. Having done so, without hesitation and as I fastened my eyes with fear on all these deceptive figures who came out from my body, the Judge told Mr First “Mind” to defend himself. So he stood up, he bowed for the Judge, and then he defended himself thus: “But of course, it was not my fault that I misled our Possessor when he was on his two dangerous journeys. I was always insane whenever our Possessor was in danger, though I wilfully misled him about the dangers on several occasions and deserted him several times as well. But I could not control my insane actions at that time!” Thus Mr First “Mind” defended himself.

But as he wanted to sit back, Mr “Memory” stood up suddenly. He asked with zeal: “But you were not insane the day that things were good for our Possessor?” As Mr First “Mind” replied “Yes!” and then sat back, the deceptive Judge “Kidney” wrote the defence of Mr First “Mind” on two white sheets of the shell.

After that, the Judge turned his deceptive eyes to Mr “Memory” and he asked loudly: “Yes, Mr ‘Memory’, what are your accusations against Mr Second ‘Mind’?”

“My accusations against Mr Second ‘Mind’ are that, although he did not mislead our Possessor throughout his two dangerous journeys, and gave him very useful advice and was also a very good partner to him, he deserted him on several occasions when he was in danger. So whenever Mr Second ‘Mind’ deserted him like that, I used to help our Possessor instead of deserting him, otherwise he would have gone wrong or been killed by the men of the wild jungles, etc. So, for this reason, I think Mr Second ‘Mind’ deserves punishment, but not to be condemned to death!” Thus Mr “Memory” accused Mr Second “Mind”.

But as soon as the deceptive Judge “Kidney” had written all the statements on another white sheet of the flat shell with his usual blue lead-pencil, he raised his head up, he told Mr Second “Mind” to give his own statement about the allegations which Mr “Memory” had made against him. Then Mr Second “Mind” stood up, he bowed for the Judge before he started to give his own statement thus: “As a matter of fact, I gave our Possessor very useful advice on his two dangerous journeys. But sometimes when he was in trouble, I deserted him as Mr ‘Memory’ has alleged. And that was when I was weak and weary or ill, or when I fell asleep unnoticed!”

When Mr Second “Mind” had explained to the Judge all that had happened to him to desert their Possessor sometimes, he bowed and sat back. The Judge wrote all his explanations on another white sheet of the flat shell. Having done so, he turned his faint eyes to me. He asked: “Yes, you as the Possessor of all of us, have you anything to say about the criminations made by Mr ‘Memory’ against Mr First ‘Mind’ and Mr Second ‘Mind’?”

But when Judge “Kidney” asked me like that, I was unable to decide within myself what to tell him. Though I had a lot of useful things, it was a pity that as my “memory”, first “mind” and second “mind” were not with me at this time, I was unable to say anything and instead, I simply nodded, for I heard words because my ears were still with me.

Then when the Judge understood that with the absence of my “memory” and “minds” I could not say a single word, he took his red lead-pencil and many sheets of the white flat shell. He wrote the judgments of Mr First “Mind” and Mr Second “Mind” on them. Having completed them, he stood up just to announce to Mr First “Mind” that he was guilty and therefore he was sentenced to death for misleading and deserting me when dangers were near. And he had already written on the white sheets of the flat shell, that Mr Second “Mind” was also guilty for deserting his Possessor and that he was also niggardly sometimes about giving his useful advice to his Possessor when he was in danger. Therefore, he was imprisoned for six years’ hard labour. Luckily, it was at this very moment that the day became lurid and thick fog came all over the hall suddenly. Now my eyes could only see things very faintly at this moment, and it could not see the figure of a person who was in the thick fog. But of course I heard his voice, which was identical to that of my own. Now I understood that this person was my “Supreme Second”.

So as my “Supreme Second” appeared suddenly in the fog, with the big law-book which he held, he sat on a chair. Then without hesitation, he put his law-book on the table which was before the chair. Having opened the law-book and read some pages as quickly as possible, he stood up and he bowed for the Judge as the Judge was preparing to announce the judgments to Mr First “Mind” and Mr Second “Mind”. He started to plead for Mr First “Mind” and Mr Second “Mind” with great pains. He pointed to the deceptive Judge “Kidney” and said: “To sentence Mr First ‘Mind’ to death means to make one of the members of his Possessor’s body incomplete. And to make one of the members of a body incomplete means that body will lose its true function and that may cause death to the possessor of the body. Therefore for this reason, your worship may change that sentence to a sort of punishment which, in any way, will not affect or harm Mr First ‘Mind’s’ Possessor!” Thus my “Supreme Second”, who was the lawyer, pleaded for Mr First “Mind”, as he stood up in the thick fog.

Again, the Lawyer “Supreme Second” hastily called the attention of the Judge “Kidney” back to the six years’ imprisonment to which he had sentenced Mr Second “Mind”. Then the Lawyer pleaded for him thus: “If Mr Second ‘Mind’ will serve the term of six years’ imprisonment, it means he has to stop the work which he is performing in the body of his Possessor for the period of six years. So as his Possessor will miss the work for that period, it may result even in death to him. So for this reason, I suggest that a sort of light punishment that which will not, in any way, debar Mr Second ‘Mind’ from performing his work, should be given to him instead!” Thus the Lawyer who was my “Supreme Second” pleaded for Mr Second “Mind” as well.

But as soon as the Judge “Kidney” had written the plea on the white sheets of the flat shell with his round shell lead-pencil, he then studied it carefully. He lifted his head up, he replied to the Lawyer: “But I am afraid, Mr Lawyer ‘Supreme Second’, that I don’t know any other kind of punishment which I can give to Mr First ‘Mind’ and Mr Second ‘Mind’ to substitute for the sentences of death and the six years’ imprisonment respectively, and which will not debar each of them from performing his work for his Possessor. But of course, as these two cases are internal ones, I shall change them to external ones so that I may hear the public opinions about them. And I shall be grateful if some more intelligent people of the town will advise me as soon as possible.

“So, I thank you very much, Mr Lawyer ‘Supreme Second’ for activities and pains you have taken in the cases! So, now, I postpone the two cases till when I hear the public opinions about them. Goodbye!”

It was like that the deceptive Judge “Kidney” concluded. But the Lawyer, my “Supreme Second”, hastily advised again: “But it would have been better if your worship could pardon both Mr First ‘Mind’ and Mr Second ‘Mind’ instead of seeking the public opinions about the cases!” But the Judge replied at the same time: “No. I am not happy to pardon them but to give them certain punishments is my happiness and contentment. For I must do justice!” Judge “Kidney” emphasized.

Then he packed all the white sheets of the flat shell and his two round shell lead-pencils. As soon as he had put them in his hand-bag, he stood up to go, but as he moved his feet he could not see the way through because of the thick fog. As soon as my “Supreme Second”, who was my Lawyer, took his big law-book he was disguised. The day which was lurid and the thick fog disappeared suddenly and then the sun began to shine. So it was at this time when the day was clear that the Judge “Kidney” could go back to my shadow which was thrown on the floor behind me by the sunbeam. Then as soon as he walked to the shadow and stood on it, he disappeared unexpectedly.

But as soon as he had disappeared, I felt that my kidney which was not in its position in me, and that its work which it had been performing in me before it was stopped for the time it was absent, had continued immediately it returned to its position in me. Yet as a dream to me, my “memory”, which had made the accusations against my first “mind” and second “mind”, changed from its deceptive human figures to the thick grey smoke as before, and then it rushed direct into my nostrils and from there into my skull. But to my surprise, it had hardly returned into my skull when every word which the Judge and the Lawyer said came to my memory.

So now as I began to wonder how both my first “mind” and second “mind” were to be punished, both of them which were also deceptive human figures changed back to the form of the thick grey smoke suddenly. Then the grey smoke rushed into my nostrils and from there into my chest. But as soon as both my “minds” and my “memory” had returned to their respective positions in me, I was able to mind things, I could think and I could memorize things.

So it was on this day I understood that everybody is created “double”. The one which is not visible to us is called “Supreme Second”. One’s “Supreme Second” is powerful more than him or her, and it is forbidden for one to see his or her own “Supreme Second”, otherwise he or she will die the very day or the day following that on which he or she has seen his or her “Supreme Second”. But one’s friend or so may see or meet on the way, his or her friend’s “Supreme Second”.

So it was at this time I understood that the day which became lurid, and the thick fog which came all over the hall, were wilfully caused by my “Supreme Second” who was the Lawyer, so that I might not be able to see him.

Now as I could memorize, think and mind things, I took the two-headed spear of the devil and many other things which I had brought to the hall and showed to the people so that they might believe the story of my journeys. Then with perfect body, I left the hall.

But as I was going along in the town to my father’s house, there came to my memory again the kinds of punishments which could be given to my first “mind” and second “mind”, and which could not disturb them from performing their duties to my body. But anything which might happen to me will also happen to my “Supreme Second”. But who could help me to solve this problem—which really puzzled me? Thus I began to think of this thing with confusion until I reached the house at noon.

So I ate and drank to my satisfaction as the people of the town were still beating the drums, singing, dancing, eating and drinking about in the town in respect of the human sacrifice which was abolished by the god and goddess of the river in respect of the two “removable heads” which I gave them. And the merriment ended in front of my father’s house in the evening of the seventh day that it had started. But as soon as the merriment was ended, the old people told my wife to bring her baby to the front of the house and in front of the two-headed spear which I had pegged on the ground, they blessed the baby and after, the whole of them returned to their houses with hilarity which could not be described.





About the Author




Amos Tutuola was born in Abeokuta, Nigeria, in 1920. The son of a cocoa farmer, he attended several schools before training as a blacksmith. He later worked as a civil servant. His first novel, The Palm-Wine Drinkard, was published in 1952 and brought him international recognition. From 1956 until retirement, he worked for the Nigerian Broadcasting Company while continuing to write. His last book, The Village Witch Doctor and Other Stories, was published in 1990. He died in Ibadan in 1997.





By the Same Author




THE PALM-WINE DRINKARD

MY LIFE IN THE BUSH OF GHOSTS

SIMBI AND THE SATYR OF THE DARK JUNGLE

THE BRAVE AFRICAN HUNTRESS

FEATHER WOMAN OF THE JUNGLE

AJAIYI AND HIS INHERITED POVERTY

PAUPER, BRAWLER AND SLANDERER

THE VILLAGE WITCH DOCTOR AND OTHER STORIES





Copyright




This ebook edition first published in 2014

by Faber and Faber Ltd

Bloomsbury House

74–77 Great Russell Street

London WC1B 3DA

All rights reserved

© The Estate of Amos Tutuola, 1981

Cover design by Faber

The right of Amos Tutuola to be identified as author of this work has been asserted in accordance with Section 77 of the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988

This ebook is copyright material and must not be copied, reproduced, transferred, distributed, leased, licensed or publicly performed or used in any way except as specifically permitted in writing by the publishers, as allowed under the terms and conditions under which it was purchased or as strictly permitted by applicable copyright law. Any unauthorised distribution or use of this text may be a direct infringement of the author’s and publisher’s rights, and those responsible may be liable in law accordingly

ISBN 978–0–571–31139–2





