DON’T PAY BAD FOR BAD



Amos Tutuola




Cheeky Frawg Books

Tallahassee, Florida

This edition copyright © 2012, the Estate of Amos Tutuola. All rights reserved. All rights reserved. No portion of this book may be reproduced by any means, mechanical, electronic, or otherwise, without first obtaining the permission of the copyright holder.

Introduction copyright © 2012 Yinka Tutuola.

Afterword copyright © 2012 Matthew Cheney.

ISBN: 978-0-9857904-3-1 (ebook edition)

Cheeky Frawg logo copyright 2011 by Jeremy Zerfoss.

Ebook design by Neil Clarke.

Cover design by Jeremy Zerfoss.

All rights reserved. No portion of this book may be reproduced by any means, mechanical, electronic, or otherwise, without first obtaining the permission of the copyright holder.

Cheeky Frawg is run by Ann & Jeff VanderMeer. Our managing editor is Therese Goulding. Additional editing help provided by Adam Mills for this book.

For a complete catalogue of Cheeky Frawg selections, visit:

www.cheekyfrawg.com

Cheeky Frawg

POB 4248

Tallahassee, FL 32315

vanderworld@hotmail.com





Contents



Introduction by Yinka Tutuola

Don’t Pay Bad For Bad

Remember The Day After Tomorrow

Ajaiyi And The Witch Doctor

The Elephant Woman

The Town Of Famine (Feather Woman Of The Jungle)

Ajantala, The Noxious Guest

The Palm-Wine Tapper And The Strange Fellows

Tort And The Dancing Market-Women

Tort’s Bitter Marriage

A Few Words As Afterword To Amos Tutuola by Matthew Cheney

Further Reading

About the Author





My Father, The Storyteller

by Yinka Tutuola




“Although his first book came off the press in 1952, The Palm-Wine Drinkard and His Dead Palm-Wine Tapster in the Dead’s Town continues to excite readers and inspire literary scholars today close to a half century later. The nine novels (counting The Wild Hunter in the Bush of Ghosts) and two collections of short stories he published in the course of his controversial but commendable and courageous career place him among the most productive of African writers, and one can argue that, like the intrepid Ogun, he cleared the path for later literary stalwarts like Chinua Achebe, Flora Nwapa, and Wole Soyinka.”

—Professor Oyekan Owomoyela, “Amos Tutuola: A Man of His Times”

My own introduction to literature was through two traditions. When I was in school we read both English and African literature in English. I enjoyed reading all the books (both English, like The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn,and the African, like The Drummer Boy, etc). But it was the African ones that I was able to identify with. However, my father’s books were unique, both to me and my friends who read them. Like in Alice in Wonderland, we were always trying to figure out the odyssey of the heroes in his books. We imagined ourselves facing the rigours, ordeals and dilemmas the heroes faced. I enjoyed all my father’s books and I used to discuss them with him. I also asked questions. But as small as I was then I could easily pick on his grammar and at times I would make suggestions.

Looking behind some years later I discovered that he preferred direct translation of the Yoruba words, thoughts and usage into English word-for-word, rather than to use their English equivalents or express them in the same way as an Englishman. This according to him added “flavor to my stories.” For example, the word “second” (a unit of time) is expressed as “a twinkle of an eye” by the Yoruba people and this is exactly how he used it in his books. There are many examples of words like this, which many thought he coined or which they attributed to his ignorance of the rules of grammar. But these kinds of expressions are the real day-to-day Yoruba way of expressing such words, thoughts, or actions.

Professor Ogundipe-Leslie noted this well when she pointed out that my father “has simply and boldly (or perhaps innocently) carried across into his English prose the linguistic pattern and literary habits of his Yoruba language, using English words as counters. He is basically speaking Yoruba but using English words.” This, I think, is one of those things that made him unique among African writers. He believed folk stories, by all means, should be told choosing words that would ultimately express the original local meaning or thought, even at the expense of good grammar. This is where some went against him. But he stood his ground and many loved him for it.

My father was a very simple, humble and hard-working gentleman. He loved his family, people and community. He was always interested in helping people. He was passionate. But he was always busy writing his stories. Whenever he was not having visitors or doing some kind of domestic work, he would be at his table writing or typing till as late as two, even three in the morning. He was never tired of writing and typing.

Anyone who had the opportunity of meeting him when he was alive would quite agree that he was far from being an introvert. He had a very good sense of humor. In fact “humor” could be said to be his language or way of expression. He never liked to be too serious about issues. He believed life should be handled with a sense of humor at all times. He believed this makes the challenges of life less intimidating and helps keep one better focused on what lines of action to take. At home and at work he was a man of humor. He taught, advised, entertained, and corrected with humor. All his novels are written demonstrations and extensions of his sense of humor, for he saw and believed himself to be an entertainer (as a story teller) rather than a writer. Actually, it was the lack of audience at his workplace that made him turn to writing out the stories on paper. Humor was not peculiar to him alone; rather it is a Yoruba character—a way of talking, passing messages, teaching morals, warning, and so on.

I could well remember a time (many years ago) when he believed I had spent too much on music and drinks. Instead of saying so directly, he asked me if I had any money with me right there and then. I told him I did and he asked me to bring out a note—any denomination. I brought one out and the next question was ‘‘Who owns it?’’ To this I said, “I do, of course!” He asked me to prove it since my name was not on it. I didn’t know how to prove it, so I asked, “Who owns it, then?” He said, “Nobody!” I knew then that he wanted to teach me something in his usual humorous way, so I asked him, “Explain how money I brought out of my pocket isn’t mine!” After a rather long pause (he always liked been dramatic) he said, “Know from today that money by itself is a long-winged bird that flies away whenever it wills, to wherever it wills; it is an illusion until it is spent on valuable things, and as such it only belongs to someone who ties it down by using it to get tangible, worthy assets having commercial value. Know that it is what you do with ‘money’ that is money!” I never forgot the lesson!

But he was far more humorous with children and teenagers (they were his best friends and he had many, because they always listened with rapt attention) than older people. He was always happy telling them folktales, and giving them funny nicknames from the stories. At times he would buy them refreshments. They loved him so much and always liked to be with him. Adults joined them at times to enjoy themselves too. He was like a village-chief living in a city. He was always accessible and approachable.

Whenever he was on annual leave (before he retired from government work) he would travel to his village with an old Pye reel-to-reel tape recorder—we used to go with him if we are on holidays—and there he collected stories of all kinds. At nights in the village, he would buy palm wine to entertain his guests, who would be competing to tell the best stories they could. He would record these stories until very late in the night. He enjoyed being in the village so much. I think if he was not working with the government, he would rather have preferred to live there among the village people, probably because of their simple ways of life.

My father used very few of these stories in his books, for he himself could develop a story from just about anything, any event. But he loved recording these stories anyway. When he returned from the village he would play them back to entertain himself and his visitors. His life was just intertwined with stories—collecting, forming, writing, or telling them. I could remember when I was in primary school and was busy with my own life that he wanted to tell me a story and I was not in the mood for stories. He was very angry with me. This happened to almost everybody in the family. He was always looking for audiences because stories gave him so much joy that he lacked interest in many other things, like going to social parties. In fact, I never saw my father dancing. He loved songs, but they are folksongs again, with stories in them. So everything about him is story, story and story. He would just look at you or an event and turn it into a story.

When reel-to-reel tape recorders went out of fashion and were replaced with more compact cassette recorders, there was a problem. He couldn’t transfer all his stories, for they were too many. He lost a great part of his collection. He was able to transfer only a few. He seemed to me to have lived two kinds of lives. While one was a real, factual physical life, the other was fictional, folkloric, and mythological. There was no doubt that it was the mythological one that gave him the greater joy.

And yet in the real sense of the word, he was not that outgoing. In this regard he was kind of choosy. He disliked meetings that are strictly formal and with all kinds of rules, etc. He disliked being in places where you cannot express yourself the way you think is appropriate, especially when you need to dress formally, follow rigid protocols, like in board meetings. This I believed was why he had academics as friends, for they care less about formalities. So he was always willing to attend their parties, lectures, discussions and so on. He seldom travelled [too far]. Especially if it would mean spending days there. This was on many occasions not his will, for throughout his adult life he suffered from a very severe duodenal ulcer and as such he lived on very special diets. For this reason he always avoided places where it would not be possible or convenient for him to get his kind of food. However, he accepted some local and foreign invitations, to give public readings, to lecture on Yoruba customs and traditions, to tell stories, and so on. He traveled to the United States, France, Italy, and the United Kingdom. But he rejected more invitations than he accepted.

As for autobiography, there is basically no autobiography in his works for they are mainly based on Yoruba folktales. Except to say that like the heroes in his works, he passed through many ordeals in life. His education and literary ordeals are well known, but there were personal ones like the ulcer, which strongly deprived him of enjoying many kinds of food and drinks throughout his adult life. Generally, he did not write himself into his books.

But he did make things up. With regard to classics like The Palm-Wine Drinkard, to start with, there is nobody like the hero “the drunkard” in the traditional folktales. This character is wholly his creation. Like the “drunkard” he also created other characters, and it is in the lives and journeys of these characters that the folktales always manifest, whether refashioned or told in a more straightforward fashion as in this collection. Without the creation of the “drunkard” and other characters there would be no central figures to “live” the folktale-life. So, he weaved folktales into his imagination, or vice versa, and it is very difficult to separate Tutuola from the folktales, or to separate the folktales from Tutuola.

Eustace Palmer said this much in The Growth of the African Novel:“Taking his stories direct from his people’s traditional lore, he uses his inexhaustible imagination and inventive power to embellish them, to add to them or alter them, and generally transform them into his own stories conveying his own image.”

Alastair Niven, in his article “Obituary: Amos Tutuola”from the June 16, 1997 issue of The Independent, wrote: “Tutuola was a born story-teller, taking traditional oral material and re-imagining it inimitably. In this way he was, though very different in method and craft, the Grimm or Perrault of Nigerian story-telling, refashioning old tales in a unique way which made them speak across cultures.” This is very true of all his works, not just The Palm-Wine Drinkard. In his work, it is therefore very difficult to separate folktales from Tutuola, or to separate Tutuola from the folktales.

The progression of my father’s career was both rewarding and sometimes difficult. His work was not known in Nigeria until The Palm-Wine Drinkardwas published in 1952 in England by Faber and Faber. It was in England that he was first acknowledged and admired, for originality. However, knowledge of his work quickly (and almost simultaneously) spread to Nigeria in particular, and Africa as a whole. He was surprised! In fact to say surprised was an understatement. I think it is more appropriate to say he was shocked. It was a big, far-away dream that became a reality. He had always wanted to entertain as many people as possible, as much for applause as anything, and all of a sudden he got an unexpected and, perhaps at that time, an unprecedented foreign attention and praise, paid from no less a country than the United Kingdom. It was a dream come true. He was more than surprised! And when he was published again in the United States . . . !

But his joy was almost doused by some of his academic kinsmen from West Africa, from Nigeria in particular. They took it upon themselves to defend the English language more than the English and the Americans combined, and refused to see anything good in the efforts of a semi-illiterate writer (by Western standards) but an undeniable professional raconteur (by Yoruba standards). To them anything, everything must be judged, evaluated, and recommended only if it passed Western tests and standards. And that was a time when they were fighting Western colonialism, imperialism, culture, influence, you name it, through the writings of their novels, poems, and other works. These West Africans were surprised, too!

As Eldred Jones wrote in an article for the Bulletin of the Association for African Literature in English, “Many West Africans could not share the general enthusiasm because they feared that Tutuola’s language would be taken as being representative of West African English, and also because recognizing, as they no doubt did, the folk stories which Tutuola so grotesquely embroidered, they gave his imagination less credit than would someone who came fresh to these fantastic adventures.”

Some even believed the days for folktales were over. Among them was Adeagbo Akinjogbin (much later a professor of History), who wrote in the June 5, 1954, issue of West Africamagazine: “Most Englishmen, and perhaps Frenchmen, are pleased to believe all sorts of fantastic tales about Africa, a continent of which they are profoundly ignorant. The ‘extraordinary books’ of Mr. Tutuola (which must undoubtedly contain some of the unbelievable things in our folklores) will just suit the temper of his European readers, as they seem to confirm their concepts of Africa. No wonder then that they are being read not only in English, but in French as well. And once this harm (I call it harm) is done, it can hardly be undone again. Mr. Tutuola will get his money and his worldwide fame all right, but the sufferers will be the unfortunate ones who have cause to come to England or Europe. I am not being unduly anxious.”

It is then clear that there were some people who preferred “our folklores” to be swept under the carpet of history. What kind of historian would like to keep the culture and tradition of his people hidden or unknown? Please note that Akinjogbin was not against the use of English in the book but the writing of “some of the unbelievable things in our folklores.”

It is good to note, however, that most of these West Africans were not writers or teachers of literature. In response to those people who believed that the positive reactions to The Palm-Wine Drinkard (especially) and other books by Tutuola were European mockery of African literature, I think the history of The Palm-Wine Drinkard (now sixty years old) and the other books has proven them wrong. In addition, Chinweizu and others have written in strong terms against such “Eurocentric critics” of African literature, including this important quote from Toward the Decolonization of African Literature:

The prejudice against the oral form manifests itself most strongly in the claim that whatever there was in the African narrative tradition has had a negative influence on the African novel by contaminating the African novel with the “deficiencies” of the oral medium. This prejudice is inculcated and employed by Eurocentric critics to shore up the eminence and authority they would like permanently to confer upon European literature over the minds of Africans. The schema of their argument is as follows: oral is bad, written is good. African narrative is oral, therefore bad; European narrative is written, therefore good. If Africans desire to progress from bad to good they must ape European narrative. Furthermore, they must not allow their apery of European narrative to be marred by influences from African narrative, which, being oral is of course indelibly bad, or beyond redemption. As examples of what they consider characteristically faulty in oral narrative, these idolaters of Europeana allege that African oral narratives have thin plots, thin narrative textures, and undeveloped characters.

Thankfully, several people stood by my father and encouraged him at the time. Many at the University of Ibadan, and later Ife, close by (geographically), were always encouraging him to move on and write more. He was always invited to their campuses for storytelling, public readings, discussions, and parties. But many others outside West Africa were encouraging too. In the United States people like Professor Bernth Lindfors and the late Professor Robert Wren were at the forefront, always in contact; while researching his works, they provided encouragement through critical analysis.

As for the criticism, I absolutely disagree that there was any element of racism in either the publication or the positive reactions The Palm-wine Drinkardenjoyed at any time. I believe we all like to read (at least, occasionally) something unique, odd, exotic or “… thronged, grisly and bewitching …” as Dylan Thomas described it in his review of the work in 1952 (the first ever, by anybody). I believe the Palm-wine Drinkardonly evoked the interest (no matter how curious) of the non-African literary world.

The reactions were genuine. Otherwise, the work, immediately after publication, would have been trashed if the initial reactions were aimed to discriminate against some African literary standard in any way, or to just “push” the book into the market. If lacking, the work would have died out after the publication of many other books written by many African (especially Nigerian) writers who are by now almost too numerous to mention by name. But, instead, the books soared in sales and praise in Europe and the United States alongside later works by African intellectuals. In addition, The Palm-wine Drinkard has been translated into (at least) twelve European and non-European languages. All of this means genuine interest and acceptance to me.

I also find this quote from Taban Lo Liyon in “Tutuola, son of Zinjanthropus,”, published in Critical Perspectives on Amos Tutuola, relevant:

Now, in all that he has done, Amos Tutuola is not sui generis. Is he ungrammatical? Yes. But James Joyce is more ungrammatical than Tutuola. Ezekiel Mphahlele has often said and written that African writers are doing violence to English. Violence? Has Joyce not done more violence to the English Language? Mark Twain’s Huckleberry Finnis written in seven dialects, he tells us. It is acknowledged a classic. We accept it, forget that it has no “grammar”, and go ahead to learn his “grammar” and what he has to tell us. Let Tutuola write “no grammar” and the hyenas and jackals whine and growl. Let Gabriel Okara write a “no grammar” Okolo. They are mum. Why? Education drives out of the mind superstition, daydreaming, building of castles in the air, cultivation of yarns, and replaces them with a rational practical mind, almost devoid of imagination. Some of these minds having failed to write imaginative stories, turn to that aristocratic type of criticism that magnifies trivialities beyond their real size. They fail to touch other virtues in a work because they do not have the imagination to perceive these mysteries. Art is arbitrary. Anybody can begin his own style. Having begun it arbitrarily, if he persists to produce in that particular mode, he can enlarge and elevate it to something permanent, to something other artists will come to learn and copy, to something the critics will catch up with and appreciate.”

Though in literary circles criticism of any particular work is still relevant will never end, his reputation is clearly different now than during the period between 1950 and 1960, in terms of better understanding and placement of his works. Through calmer reassessments the virtues in these works are emerging and are being recognized and praised.

For example, in “The Palm-Wine Drinkard: A Reassessment of Amos Tutuola” from the Journal of Commonwealth Literature, Professor Omolara Ogundipe-Leslie wrote: “What commands acclaim is Tutuola’s use of his materials, chosen from all and sundry, and minted to make something beautiful, new and undeniably his own. He has handled his material with all of the skill of the good storyteller and he has been able to endow it with the qualities of a ‘well-told-tale’.”

In “Amos Tutuola: The Nightmare of the Tribe,” published in Introduction to Nigerian Literature, O.R. Dathorne also said: “Tutuola deserves to be considered seriously because his work represents an intentional attempt to fuse folklore with modern life. In this way he is unique, not only in Africa, where the sophisticated African writer is incapable of this tenuous and yet controlled connection, but in Europe as well, where this kind of writing is impossible.”

My father passed away in June of 1997 at the age of seventy-seven. As Robert Elliot Fox said in his article for Research in African Literature, “Tutuola and the Commitment to Tradition,” “Whatever else may be said about his work, it undeniably is part of the foundation of African writing—that part which is sunk most deeply in the substratum and psyche of African culture and imagination. However high and wide the African literary edifice grows, we’ll keep coming back to Tutuola, not just as an historically important entity, but as a necessary counterpoint to other developments. Tutuola has become, and as time passes, will continue to become, less exotic and more inevitable as a contributor to the realm of African lit/orature. While we mourn his death, let us celebrate the life of his writings.”

Works Referenced

Adeagbo Akinjogbin, Letter to West Africa, June 5, 1954. Critical Perspectives on Amos Tutuola. Ed. Bernth Lindfors. Washington: Three Continents Press, 1975

Chinweizu, Onwuchekwa Jemie, and Ihechukwu Madubuike, Toward the Decolonization of African Literature Vol. 1. Enugu: Fourth Dimension Publishers, 1980.

O.R. Dathorne, “Amos Tutuola: The Nightmare of the Tribe”. Introduction to Nigerian Literature. Ed. Bruce King. New York: Africana Publishing, 1972.

Robert Elliot Fox, “Tutuola and the Commitment to Tradition”. Research in African Literatures, vol. 29, no. 3 (Autumn, 1998), pp. 203-208.

Eldred Jones, “Amos Tutuola—The Palm-Wine Drinkard: Fourteen Years On”. Bulletin of the Association for African Literature in English, no. 4 (1966), pp. 24-30.

Taban Lo Liyon, “Tutuola, Son of Zinjanthropus”. Critical Perspectives on Amos Tutuola. Ed. Bernth Lindfors. Washington: Three Continents Press, 1975.

Alastair Niven, “Obituary: Amos Tutuola”. The Independent, June 16, 1997.

Omolara Ogundipe-Leslie, “The Palm-Wine Drinkard: A Reassessment of Amos Tutuola”. Journal of Commonwealth Literature, no. 9 (1970), pp. 48-56.

Oyekan Owomoyela, “Amos Tutuola: A Man of His Times”. ALA Bulletin, vol. 23, no. 3 (1997), pp. 15-16.

Eustace Palmer, The Growth of the African Novel. London: Heinemann, 1979.





DON’T PAY BAD FOR BAD




There once lived two tight friends named Dola and Babi. Both were ladies. Babi and Dola had liked each other since when they were children. They wore the same kind of clothes and were always going everywhere together in their village and to several other villages as well. Because of this, many people thought that they were twins.

Both went everywhere together until they grew old enough to marry. But, as they liked each other so much, they decided to marry two men of the same family and who lived in the same house, so that they might be with each other always.

Luckily, a few days after they had agreed to do so, they heard of two men who were born by the same father and mother and lived in the same house as well. So Babi married the one who was the junior and Dola married the second one who was the senior. Now, Babi and Dola were very happy because they were living together in their husbands’ house as when they had not been married.

A few days after their marriage, Dola cleared a part of the front of the house very neatly. She sowed one kola-nut on that spot. After a few weeks, the kola-nut shot out. Having seen this, she filled up one big jar with water and put it before her new kola-nut tree. Very early in the morning, Dola would go and kneel down before her tree and jar, and then she would pray to the tree to help her get a baby in time. Then after the prayer, she would drink some of the water which was inside the jar. Dola believed that there was a certain spirit who was coming and blessing the kola-nut tree and the water in the night. Having done all this, then she would go back to her room before the rest of the people in the house would wake.

After some months, the kola-nut tree grew up to the height of about two feet. But unfortunately, the animals of the village began to eat the leaves of the tree and this hindered its growth. One morning, Babi saw Dola, her friend, as she knelt down before the tree and jar praying. After the prayer, Babi asked, “Dola, what are you doing before that kola-nut tree and the jar?”

“Oh, this kola-nut tree is my God and I always ask it to help me to get a baby in time,” Dola, pointing a finger to the tree and jar, explained quietly.

When Babi noticed that the animals had eaten the leaves of the tree, she went back to her room. She brought the head of her large pitcher from which the body had been broken away. She gave it to Dola and advised her to cover her tree with it so that the animals might not be able to eat the leaves of the tree again. Dola took it from her and thanked her greatly. Then she covered her tree with it, and as from that morning the animals were unable to eat the leaves again, and the tree then grew as quickly as possible in the centre of the head of the pitcher.

A few years later, the tree yielded the first kola-nuts. The nuts were of the best quality in the village. For this reason the kola-nut buyers bought them with a considerable amount of money. And when the tree yielded the second and the third crop of nuts, the buyers bought them with as large a sum of money as before. So in selling these nuts, Dola became a wealthy woman.

Having seen this, Babi was so jealous that one day she asked, “Please, Dola, will you return the head of my pitcher this morning?”

“What? The head of your pitcher?” Dola shouted with great shock.

“Yes, the head of my pitcher. I want it back this morning,” Babi replied in a jealous voice.

“Well, the head of your pitcher cannot be returned at this time unless I break it into pieces before it will be able to come out of my tree,” Dola replied with a dead voice.

“The head of my pitcher must not break nor split in any part before you return it to me,” Babi shouted without mercy.

“I say it cannot be taken away from the tree unless the tree is cut down!” Dola explained loudly.

“Yes, you may cut the tree down if you wish to do so, but at all costs I want the head of my pitcher back!” Babi boomed at Dola.

“But Babi, remember that both of us have been friends since when we were children. Therefore, do not attempt to destroy my kola-nut tree,” Dola begged Babi.

“Yes, of course, I don’t forget at any time that we are friends, but at any rate, I want the head of my pitcher now!” Babi insisted with a great noise.

At last, when it was revealed to Dola that Babi simply wanted her tree to be destroyed so that she might not get kola-nuts to sell anymore, she went to the court of law. She sued Babi for trying to destroy her tree. But, when the judge failed to persuade Babi not to take the head of her pitcher back, he judged the case in favour of her, that Dola must return the head of the pitcher to her.

With great sorrow, the kola-nut tree was cut down and the head of the pitcher was taken away from the tree and returned to Babi. Babi was now very happy, not because of her pitcher but of Dola’s tree which was cut down. After that she and Dola entered the house and they continued their friendship as before and Dola did not show her sorrow for her tree in her behaviour towards Babi.

A few months after the tree was cut down, Babi delivered a female baby. In the morning that Babi’s baby would be named, Dola gave her a fine brass ring as a present to put on her baby’s neck, because brass was one of the most precious metals in those days. Babi took the brass ring from Dola with great admiration and she put it on her baby’s neck at the same time. This brass ring had been carefully moulded without any joint.

Ten years passed away when one fine morning, as Babi’s baby was celebrating her tenth birthday, Dola went to Babi, and asked gently, “Babi, my good friend, I shall be very glad if you will return my brass ring this right fine morning.”

“Which brass ring?” Babi sprang up and shouted.

“My old brass ring which is now on your daughter’s neck,” Dola pointed a finger at the girl’s neck, as if she was simply joking with her.

“This very brass ring, on my daughter’s neck?” Babi was trembling with fear.

“Yes, please,” Dola replied quietly.

“Please, Dola, my good friend, don’t try to take your brass ring back. As you know, before the ring can be taken away from my daughter’s neck, her head must be cut off first because it is already bigger than the ring!” Babi begged with tears.

“I won’t force you to cut off the head of your daughter, but I want my brass ring back without cutting it!” Dola insisted.

At last, when Babi failed to persuade Dola not to take her brass ring back from her, she went to the same court of law. She sued Dola for tying to kill her daughter. Unfortunately, the case was judged in favour of Dola when she related the story of her kola-nut tree, which was cut down when Babi insisted on taking the head of her pitcher back. The judge added that the head of Babi’s daughter would be cut off in the palace of the king and in the presence of the whole people of the village, so that everybody might learn that jealousy was bad. Then a special day was fixed to behead Babi’s daughter so that the brass ring could be taken away from her neck.

When that day came, the whole people of the village gathered in the front of the palace and the king sat in the middle of the prominent people. Then the king told Babi loudly to put her ten-year-old daughter in the centre of the crowd and she did so. She and her daughter stood, and both were trembling with fear while the swordsman, ready to behead her daughter, stood at the back of the girl with a sword in hand, waiting to hear the order from the king and then to behead her.

Then the king announced loudly to Babi, “As Dola’s kola-nut tree was cut down when you insisted on taking the head of your pitcher back, so the head of your daughter will be cut off now, so Dola’s brass ring can be taken away from your daughter’s neck and given back to her.”

The people were so quiet with mercy that it was a few minutes after the king had made his announcement to Babi before they could talk to each other, and the people mumbled again with grief when the king gave the order to the swordsman to behead the daughter.

But, as the swordsman raised the sword up to cut the head off, Dola hastily stopped him and announced loudly,

“It will be a great pity if this ten-year old daughter is killed, because she has not offended me, but her jealous mother has. And, I believe, if we continue to pay bad for bad, bad will never end on earth, therefore, I forgive what Babi has done to my kola-nut tree!”

The king and the rest of the people clapped loudly for Dola immediately when she pardoned Babi. Then everyone went back to his or her house with gladness, and Dola and Babi were good friends throughout their lives’ time.





REMEMBER THE DAY AFTER TOMORROW




“Remember the day after tomorrow, my sons.” That was how the father, when he was alive, used to warn his two sons, Yaya and Shita, whenever they offended one who was older than them. But alas, the two boys did not understand what their old and weary father meant by that, and they did not remember to ask the meaning of this proverb from him until he died.

“Perhaps ‘Remember the day after tomorrow’ is the name of our eldest brother who was born and had left our father for another town before we were born?” Yaya suggested one day to his young brother, Shita.

“And probably our father is just reminding us not to forget him!” Shita supported his brother because both of them were puzzled about this warning.

At last, the two brothers put in their minds that “Remember the day after tomorrow” was the name of their eldest brother who was born and had left their father for another town before they were born. But unfortunately, a few years after their father had started to warn them like that continuously he died, and two months later their old mother died as well. Then these two boys began to take care of themselves, but not as satisfactorily as their father and mother when they were alive.

Their father and mother had hunchbacks before they died and so did Yaya and Shita. So for their strange hunchbacks, the rest people in their town used to call them “Hunchback family.”

A year after their father and mother died, a strange man came to them in their father’s house. The name of the strange man was Totofioko. Totofioko was an expert trickster and kidnapper of children. He overheard whenever the father of the two boys warned them, “Remember the day after tomorrow, my children.” He noticed as well that every one of them had a hunch on their back. So, one day he put a flat stone on his back in such a perfect way that the stone seemed exactly like a real hunch when he wore big garments. After that he took a big suit case, a very costly umbrella, put on costly shoes and then went to Yaya and Shita in their father’s house, and he met them as they sat down in the sitting room.

“Hello, my two junior brothers!” Totofioko entered the room and put down the costly umbrella, suit case, etc., which he had held. “I am very sorry to tell you now that this is the first time I have come home since when both of you were born!” Totofioko explained to the two boys loudly and with a joyful voice immediately after he entered the sitting room.

“Hello sir! Welcome sir! Please have a seat sir!” Yaya and Shita received Totofioko with great respect, especially when they saw the costly garments which he wore and the costly suit case and umbrella he carried.

“This is cold water, sir!” Shita ran to the pot of water and brought the cold water over. He knelt down with great respect as he was giving him the water.

Then Totofioko drank the water and rested for a few minutes. He asked them, as if he had not yet heard of the death of their father and mother, “Where is your father?”

“Father? Our father has been dead over a year now,” Yaya and Shita explained at once with sorrow.

“Do you remember that your father, before he died, was warning you that you must not forget, ‘Remember the day after tomorrow?” Totofioko asked with grief.

“Oh, yes, our father always used to warn us before he died that we must ‘Remember the day after tomorrow,’ and he told us also that ‘Remember the day after tomorrow’ was coming home soon!” Shita hastily explained.

“Was that so? Good!” Totofioko asked and then paused for a few moments as he raised his head up and down in a slow motion, as if he was thinking seriously about the father’s death.

“I confess to both of you now that I am your eldest brother, whose name your father, before he died, was always mentioning to you. My name is ‘Remember the day after tomorrow’ and I am before you today!” Totofioko stood up and posed before the two boys for a few minutes and then sat back down. “I was born and went to another town before both of you were born; therefore, both of you are my junior brothers because your father was my father as well. So I have come to stay with you and I shall be taking great care of you, as well as our father did before he died. To make it even clearer to you that I am your eldest brother, the first born of our father, look at my hunchback; see how it resembles that of your own.” Totofioko stood up and showed them his own false hunchback and then sat back down. “Of course, it is bigger than your own, and that must be so, because I am older than you!” Totofioko, with his trick, persuaded the two boys in such a way that they admitted at the same time that he was their eldest brother.

“Hah-a-a! This is our eldest brother whose name is ‘Remember the day after tomorrow.’” Yaya and Shita embraced Totofioko with gladness, for they admitted that he was their eldest brother.

“By the way, where is your mother, who is my mother as well?” Totofioko asked loudly with his trick.

“She died just a few months after our father’s death,” the two boys replied with sorrow.

“Hoo-hoo-hoo!” Totofioko cried with his trick, having already heard that from the town boys. He covered the head with both palms and wept bitterly for a few minutes. But he did all this just to deceive the two boys.

“Hah! Stop weeping, brother! What are you doing all that for! Stop that, sir!” The two boys caressed Totofioko until he stopped weeping. Then he stood up. He walked up and down the house. He peeped into every room just to know the kind of property whichwas inside them.

I am glad. All the property in the rooms is precious enough to be carried away to my town, Totofioko thought in his mind before he came back to the sitting room where the boys were preparing food. He and the boys ate it together.

After a few days of Totofioko being with them as their brother, one morning he told them, “Yes, as both of you are aware that only the eldest brother or the eldest person in the family is to be in charge of all the property of their dead father. Therefore, I want you to gather all of our father’s property together and bring it before me now. But, instead of sharing them now, I shall keep them in one of the rooms. I shall lock up the room and keep the key for myself!” Totofioko deceived the two boys.

“You are quite right to do so, sir, and you are the right person in our family to do that!” Yaya and Shita exclaimed with gladness. Then they gathered all of their father and mother’s property together and brought it to him. He put the property in one of the rooms. He locked up the door of that room and kept the key in his pocket, because in fact, it really was the eldest person in the family who had the right to keep the property of their dead father.

At midnight, when Totofioko noticed that the boys were sleeping deeply, he opened the door of that room. He took out all of the property, carried it to his own town, which was far off, and then he came back before daybreak. But the two boys did not know that their inherited property had already gone to Totofioko’s town.

Having spent a few days with them, he advised the two boys, “I believe things are too dull in this town. So, I shall take both of you to the town from where I came to you. You will be working in that town and earning a large sum of money. I believe, in one year’s time, each one of you will become a rich man. Out of your savings, you will marry beautiful ladies, and after that you can come back to this town to enjoy your lives as you like!” Totofioko deceived Yaya and Shita just to take them to his town as well and sell them as slaves.

“Thank you, brother, for your useful advice. But who will be taking care of our property after we have gone away with you?” Yaya and Shita asked with surprise.

“Never mind about our property, my junior brothers. You should not be afraid; there is no thief who can break into the room to pack the property away. Now, look at this juju” Totofioko showed them one wrapped leaf, “which I am going to hang on the main door now. Its work is to keep all thieves away from this house!” Totofioko stood up, went to the main door, and hung the wrapped leaf on the door.

Then in the following morning, they followed Totofioko to his town, and on their arrival he sold all of their father and mother’s property to an auctioneer.

“Ah, these are our inherited property! Don’t sell them to the auctioneer!” Yaya and Shim shouted greatly when it was revealed to them that Totofioko had carried their property to his town and that he wanted to sell it.

“Shut your mouths there! Or don’t you know who you are talking to?” Totofioko boomed at the two boys and struck their mouths with a stick,

“Don’t be harsh to us like this! Please remember that you have confessed to us that you are our eldest brother whose name is ‘Remember the day after tomorrow’,” Yaya reminded him with due respect.

“Who is your brother? Tell me now! Who is your brother?” Totofioko shouted terribly at them, so terribly that Yaya and Shita could not talk again.

“I am afraid everything has changed now!” Shita whispered to Yaya.

In the following morning, Totofioko sold the poor boys to the slave buyer, and at that time it was revealed to Yaya and Shita that Totofioko was not their brother in any way, but he was an expert trickster, deceiver, thief and kidnapper of children.

One morning, as Yaya and Shita were tilling the ground in the front of the house of the slave buyer who bought them, Totofioko, who was well-dressed in costly garments, came to them and then he proudly told them, “I am sorry that it is too late for you to understand that ‘Remember the day after tomorrow’ is not the name of a person, but it is a warning. And it would have been better for you if you had asked the meaning of it from your father before he died. Then there would not a deceiver like myself who would be able to deceive you like this. And it is also a good practice for a young boy who does not understand a warning or proverb to ask for its full meaning before it is too late!” Totofioko explained to Yaya and Shita with pride and then hastily went away as they were weeping bitterly.





AJAIYI AND THE WITCH DOCTOR




There once lived an old man in a village. He was a farmer and he had one son named Ajaiyi. This old man was so poor that all of his friends and neighbours believed that he was really created from poverty by his creator. After several years’ hard work, this old man became too old and weary to work on his farm, so Ajaiyi, his only son, took over for him. He was working hard on his old father’s farm and by that he was getting sufficient food to feed his father and himself. Ajaiyi worked as hard as he could until he became about thirty years old, but yet, he and his father’s poverty became worse than ever.

Although Ajaiyi and his father were poorer than the church rat, it came to Ajaiyi’s mind one midnight to marry a lady. Having thought so within himself for some weeks, he brought this matter before his weary father.

“My father, how can I get money to marry a lady, as I am old enough now?” Ajaiyi gently asked his father.

“In fact, according to our custom, it is a father’s right to pay the dowry of his son’s first wife. But now, it is a pity, as you know, that I am so poor that I have not even a half penny to give you to pay for the dowry of a lady. I am very sorry indeed, Ajaiyi,” Ajaiyi’s father explained quietly with tears. Then Ajaiyi left him in the room and went to the front of the house. He sat on the pavement and wept bitterly for many hours.

After a while, it came to Ajaiyi’s mind to pawn himself for money. And at the same time, he went to a wealthy pawnbroker who gave him sufficient money, with which he married a beautiful and sensible lady the following week.

A few months after his marriage, his old father became so ill that he died within a few days. But unfortunately, this time Ajaiyi had no money with which to perform the funeral of his dead father. Of course, as this was a great shame to Ajaiyi if he failed to perform the ceremony, he pawned himself to another pawnbroker who gave him the money to perform the ceremony.

Now, Ajaiyi had pawned himself to two pawnbrokers. He was working for the first from morning till twelve o’clock and for the second from one o’clock till the sun set. But, as he had no more time now to work on his own farm for his and his wife’s living, his poverty became more serious. And as everything was still growing from bad to worse every day, his wife advised him one day, “Ajaiyi, will you go to the ‘Witch Doctor’ and find out the causes of our fast growing poverty, and find out as well what willstop it!”

Without hesitation, Ajaiyi went to the village witch doctor. He explained his difficulties to him. With sharp and merciless voice the witch doctor replied, “Yes, if you want your inherited poverty to stop, you must buy nine big rams and nine empty sacks. Having bought them and brought them back to your house, you will put each of the nine rams alive inside of each of the nine empty sacks. Then at midnight, or when you are quite sure that the rest people in the village are asleep, you will carry all to the grave of your dead father and put all on top of the grave. Having done so, you must come and inform me at the same time. But to be sure whether your dead father has taken the whole rams away, you will go back to the grave in the following morning. And, I am quite sure, you will meet only the empty sacks on top of the grave, and that means your dead father has taken all the nine rams. Try to take the empty sacks back to your house and keep them in your room, and you will see that in a few days’ time, all will be filled up with money by your dead father, and then your poverty will finish.”

When the witch doctor explained it to Ajaiyi like that, he thanked him and then left him. But as he was returning to his house in the darkness, he was thinking within himself, The witch doctor said I must sacrifice nine rams to my dead father before he would stop my poverty, but I believe I will never be free from this poverty, because I have no money to buy even one cock. How much more for nine rams? Ajaiyi was thinking just like that until he entered his house unnoticed.

“What did the witch doctor tell you about our poverty, Ajaiyi?” Ajaiyi’s wife hastily asked as he entered.

He explained to her. But, when he explained further that he had no money to buy the nine rams and nine empty sacks, his wife said loudly, “Ah, you said you have no money to buy the rams! Are we going to die in this poverty? Better you pawn yourself to the third pawnbroker who will give you the money to buy the rams and the empty sacks!”

“Ah! To pawn myself to the third pawnbroker? But I am afraid if I do so; how can I satisfy the whole of them, and who will be working for our living then?” Ajaiyi asked with great sorrow.

“Never mind about our living. I believe if you work hard, you will satisfy the whole pawnbrokers!” Ajaiyi’s wife advised him strongly.

The following day, Ajaiyi went to the third pawnbroker, who gave him ten pounds. Then he and his wife went to the market with the ten pounds. But unfortunately, the ten pounds were not sufficient to buy the whole nine rams and nine empty sacks. Having seen this, Ajaiyi was greatly perplexed. He told his wife to let them return home with the money.

“Oh, my husband, don’t let us go home with this money. Otherwise we shall spend it for another thing, and our poverty will still remain as worse as before. Now, let us buy as many rams and empty sacks as we can buy. Then at midnight, you will carry them to the grave of your father. You will explain before the grave that you will bring the rest other rams as soon as you have money to buy them. And, I believe, your dead father will not refuse to accept them, because he knew that he had left you in great poverty before he died.”

Ajaiyi agreed when his wife advised him like that. Then they bought six rams and six empty sacks, which the ten pounds could buy, and they carried them back to the house.

When it was midnight, Ajaiyi put each of the rams inside of each of the sacks. He carried them one by one to the grave of his father, which was about a half of a mile from the village. Having put them on top of the grave, he explained before it, “My father, please take these six rams as the first installment and I shall bring the other three for you as soon as you help me to get money to buy them.”

Having done all that, Ajaiyi went directly to the witch doctor. He told him that he had carried six rams to the grave. The witch doctor thanked him with great laughter and then advised him that he must not delay before taking the other three to the grave. After that Ajaiyi came back to his house. But he had hardly left when the witch doctor and his servants went to the grave and then carried the six rams to his own house. He killed them all for his food and then he gave the empty sacks to his servants to return them to the grave before daybreak.

It was hardly morning when Ajaiyi and his wife ran to the grave, and both were very happy when they met only empty sacks on top of the grave. Then they collected the sacks and came back to the house with gladness. Ajaiyi put them in one of the rooms, and then he and his wife were expecting that their poverty would soon stop. They waited and waited and waited for so many months, but his dead father did not send any money to him, and their poverty had become extremely worse, and again the whole pawnbrokers were then dragging him here and there, for he could not satisfy each of them. He blamed his wife with sorrow. “I told you that day that we should return home with the ten pounds, as it was not sufficient to buy the whole nine rams at a time!”

“Ajaiyi, don’t let us give up yet. We must try hard. My advice now is to go back to the witch doctor and find out why our poverty is still getting worse than before we sacrificed the six rams to your dead father.” Ajaiyi’s wife advised him softly. Again, Ajaiyi ran back to the witch doctor and asked for the reason.

“Ah! Ajaiyi, your poverty cannot stop until after you have taken the other three rams to your dead father!” the witch doctor frightened Ajaiyi.

Without hesitation, Ajaiyi came back to his house and he told his wife what the witch doctor had told him to do before their poverty would stop.

“What are we going to do next to get the money to buy the other three rams and the empty sacks?” she asked calmly.

“As we have not even one penny in hand, how much more to get such big money to buy three rams and sacks?” Ajaiyi said. “But now, my intention is that when it is midnight, I will visit my father in his grave. I will tell him this—”

“You knew that I was in poverty before you died, but after you died and were buried, you are now demanding nine rams from me, and in failing to give them to you I will remain in poverty throughout my lifetime. Of course, I tried all my best and brought six for you, but I was told by the same witch doctor that unless I give you the other three rams you will not set me free from the poverty in which you had left me before you died.”

Ajaiyi explained further to his wife that if his dead father confirmed what the witch doctor had told him to do, then he would behead him before he could come out of his grave.

“Ah, Ajaiyi, how can you manage to see your dead father? Please don’t attempt to do that,” his wife feared greatly.

In the midnight, Ajaiyi sharpened his long and heavy machete. He took three empty sacks and then went to the grave of his father. He filled two sacks with earth in such a perfect way that each seemed to contain a big ram, and then he put both on top of the grave. Having done that, he left the third sack and his machete on the grave, then went to the witch doctor. He told him that he had put the other three rams on top of the grave. The witch doctor burst into great laughter when he heard so and he was still laughing when Ajaiyi left him and came back to the grave. He put the third empty sack on top of the grave as well. He held his long machete and entered the sack and then cast down in it and was expecting his father to take the three sacks into his grave.

After about two hours, the witch doctor and his servants walked in the darkness to the grave. He instructed his servants to carry the three sacks to his house. The servants had hardly put the sacks down before his gods when he began to loosen them one by one with the hope to bring the rams out and then to return the empty sacks to the grave before daybreak, as he did for the first time.

But he was greatly shocked when he saw the earth in the first two sacks instead of rams, and he had hardly loosened the third when Ajaiyi jumped out suddenly with his long sharp machete, raised above head.

“Ah, Ajaiyi, you were in the sack as well!” the witch doctor and his servants shouted greatly with fear as they defended their heads and faces.

Without hesitation, Ajaiyi walked wildly to the witch doctor. He stood firmly before him and his servants as he raised the machete above his head and then he said quietly, “Hun-un! So you took the rams for yourself and not my dead father. The rams in respect of which I had pawned myself to the third pawnbroker and—”

“Oh, let me confess to you now, Ajaiyi. It was not your dead father who had taken all your rams. I was the person who had taken them! I beg you now to forgive me!” the witch doctor hastily confessed as Ajaiyi was preparing to machete him and his servants to death.

“But I believe you are my dead father who had taken my rams, therefore you are to set me free from my poverty this midnight!” Ajaiyi shouted greatly as he threatened him with the machete.

“Not at all. I am not your dead father, therefore I have no power to set you free from your poverty and—” the witch doctor explained loudly with fear.

But Ajaiyi hardly heard that when he snatched his right hand and then asked loudly, “Tell me the truth! Will you set me free from my inherited poverty this midnight?”

“Only your dead father has the power to set you free from you pov–” But as the witch doctor was still saying this, his servants rushed against Ajaiyi, and the witch doctor joined his servants at the same time. They all were just trying to take the machete from him. Having struggled for a few minutes, Ajaiyi overpowered them when he struck some of them with the machete. Again, he snatched the right hand of the witch doctor and then began to drag him here and there in the room. But when he shouted for help, Ajaiyi closed his mouth with the flat part of his machete. Having seen this, -his servants stretched up their hands and kept quiet at the same time.

“Certainly, you are my dead father who will set me free from poverty this midnight!” Ajaiyi roared greatly.

“But Ajaiyi, I am not a dead man! I am the witch doctor of this village!” the witch doctor murmured with fear, especially when he looked around and saw that all of his servants had escaped outside for their lives.

“If you are dead or not, I don’t care, but show me where you keep all your money!” Ajaiyi shouted and was pushing him with the machete.

Willing or not, the witch doctor walked with trembling body to the spot where he kept his money: in a big pot buried before his gods. He pointed his finger to it without hesitation.

Ajaiyi dug the pot out. He put the whole of it on his head and then carried it to his house that night. When he and his wife counted the money, it was more than six hundred pounds. So, Ajaiyi and his wife were freed from their poverty that night.





THE ELEPHANT WOMAN




There was a man who was a hunter of lion, tiger, elephant, etc., so he was always going to the far bush to hunt. Sometimes it would be about four or more days before he would return to town.

He had a wife who had not yet had a child since he had married her.

One day he went to a very far bush to hunt, and there he climbed a tree to look at every part of that place for the elephant. Then he got ready to shoot her, but before he could get a good chance to shoot the gun at the right part of her body, she traveled to a big tree which had many buttresses, and she stopped between two buttresses while this hunter was looking at her.

After a little while she took her skin away from her body and folded it; then she put it inside a hole at the bottom of the tree and covered the hole with dried leaves. Then, she dressed herself with real clothes, which made her a beautiful woman, and then she put some provisions inside a flat tray. These provisions were sugar, matches, milk, tobacco, etc. Having put the tray on her head, she set off at once to the market, which was in the town in which this hunter was living.

After she had gone very far, the hunter came down from the tree and went to the big tree and took out the skin from the hole in which she had put it away safely. But as this was very strange to him, he took the skin and folded it securely and then used his supernatural power so that he reached his house at the same moment. There, without hesitation, he climbed the ceiling of the house and hid this skin there.

His aim was that when she returned from the market to that big tree to take the skin, she would not find it to wear as usual, because he wanted her to remain as a woman, since she was a very beautiful woman, though she was an elephant.

Immediately after he hung the skin on the ceiling of his house, he used his power again and came back to the same bush. Then he climbed the same tree, where he waited for her to return from the market. When it was about five o’clock in the evening, she returned from the market with plenty of new provisions, which she had just bought from the market, having sold the old ones.

He looked at her from the top of that tree where he had hid himself. When she came to this big tree, she looked inside the hole in which she had hid the skin but found nothing there. After that she looked around the tree again, but that was also in vain. When she believed that her skin could not be found, she sat down near this tree and started to weep bitterly because she could not change to an elephant again and could not return to her family.

Then the hunter came down from the top of the tree and went to her. He asked her, as if he did not know what had happened to her, “By the way, how did you manage to come to a far and dreadful bush such as this from your town, being a woman and not a man?”

But this woman replied that she was searching for something. Then the hunter asked for the name of the thing she was searching for.

She replied that it was a secret thing which could not be mentioned out loud.

After both of them had argued for some hours, he told her that he would marry her. Willing or not, she agreed, because she could not remain in this bush in the form of a woman.

Of course, before she agreed to marry him, she warned him seriously that she was an elephant who was a trader and that he must not tell her secret to his first wife, and he said, “I would not.” After that she followed him to his town. When they reached his home, he told his first wife, “This is my new wife that I married today.” He showed her to his mother as well.

After some months had passed, this first wife was asking him secretly what town did he bring this beautiful woman from, but he did not answer this question at all.

Luckily, within six months from when he had brought this elephant woman to the house, she conceived, and when it was time she delivered twin babies, but the first wife had none. For this reason, she was then playing her best part of love to their husband in such a way that, one day, when he laid down in the parlor after he had drunk too much, she asked, “Please tell me how you managed before you married this new wife?”

And as he had over-drunk, he told this first wife, “She is an elephant and her skin is hidden on the ceiling.” Here he disclosed the secret of this elephant woman to his first wife.

But as women cannot keep such a terrible secret in mind for a long time, within a few days, whenever their husband was away from the town, she was telling this elephant woman in a proverb that “Eat, drink and be merry, your skin is on the ceiling.” After she had been repeating this proverb for two months, this elephant woman understood what she was saying.

One day when there was nobody at home, the elephant woman climbed the ceiling just to make sure whether it was the truth that her skin was there. After that she came down, and she did not show in her attitude that she had discovered her skin. A few days later, when the former wife repeated this proverb as usual, without hesitation she climbed the ceiling; she wore the skin and became an elephant at once. Then she jumped down. Immediately all the people in that house saw her as an elephant. They were greatly frightened, and, before they could escape for their life, she crushed the former wife to death, although she did not harm the rest.

Without more ado she ran hastily to their husband in the bush where he went to hunt.

Immediately he saw her in the form of an elephant. He got ready to shoot her, for he thought that she was not his wife. Of course, before he could do that, she spoke out as a person: “I warned you seriously not to tell my secret to your former wife before I followed you from bush to the town. But now, as you have failed to keep the secret, so today, as I have discovered my skin and worn it, I am going back to my own town which belongs only to elephants. Please try your best to keep safe my son and daughter. Goodbye.”

But when the hunter heard this from her, he started to beg her not to leave him. Then she replied, “Can I follow you back to the town in my present form? No, that cannot be done at all at this stage, for you have failed to comply with my warning.”

Immediately as she had uttered these words, she went away hastily, singing the joyful song along in the bush to her town. As this song was so joyful, he sang it with her and followed her until they had traveled about fifty miles in that bush, before she reached her town, which was in the form of a round hill. Then she blew a kind of alarm to the rest of the elephants, which meant, “Open the door, I return today.” At the same time that the rest heard this alarm, a million elephants rushed out from that hill, which opened like a gate of a big town. They gripped her with joy and took her to the inside of the hill.

This was the end of the elephant that he had married as his wife. Then he returned from there to his town with sorrow, because his first wife had been crushed to death by the elephant.





THE TOWN OF FAMINE

(Feather Woman of the Jungle)




On the fourth night, when the people gathered in the front of my house and drinks were served as they were dancing and singing with great joy, I stopped them and I addressed them first as follows: “I am very happy indeed to see all of you again in front of me, and I thank every one of you for the true affection you have for me, although I am the head of the village. And I wonder greatly, too, to see that your number is increased again this night by more than 90 percent.”

“But,” I said (as all sat quietly and paid great attention to me), “when I first saw the whole of you, I was afraid, but after I thought within myself about where to get sufficient planks to make coffins for every one of you when you die, because you are too many. But when I thought it over again, I remembered that not all of you would need coffins to bury you when you die. Because many of you would be killed and eaten up by the wild animals. Many would die in the rivers, many would be burnt into ashes by the fire, many would be kidnapped, and so many of you would have fallen into the wells. So therefore, coffins would not be required for those who died such deaths, and so many would not die in their homes, but instead where their people would not see their bodies to bury with coffins.”

But the people were greatly annoyed when they heard the likes of that from me. All were snapping their fingers above their heads and saying that they would not die in the rivers or in the fire or in the wells or eaten up by the wild animals, but they would die in their homes, villages, etc., and they would be buried with coffins. But after a while, when their noises went down, I explained to them that they must not misunderstand me, because there was nobody on earth who could know the real place and real time he or she is going to die, or if anyone knew, let him or her tell me. And, if anyone knew, it meant I was guilty of what I had said. Having said so, I hesitated to hear their reply, but none of the people could reply, they admitted at last.

After they danced and drank some of their palm wine, I started to tell them the story as follows,

One fine morning, six months after I had returned from my third journey, I took my usual gun, hunting-bag and machete. I bade good-bye to my father, mother, sister and brother and all my friends and my neighbours. Some of the people cautioned me very seriously not to go for any treasure again. They said that all I had brought was enough, but I told them that I must try more, for we knew of today but we did not know of tomorrow.

Then I left my village that bright day, and I was going to the north this time. Having travelled for several days, I came to a town. This town was very big and famous. It was near a very wide and deep river. When I entered the town I was greatly shocked with fear when I saw the terrible appearances of the inhabitants. Every one of them was so lean that he had no more muscle on his body. Every one of them was as thin as a dried stick. The legs and arms were just like sticks. The eyes were seen faintly in the skull, but the head was so big that the thin neck could not even carry it. Both upper and lower jaws had already dried up like a roasted meat. The stomach was no more to be seen, unlike the breast and exposed ribs.

When I first saw them in that appearances, I thought within myself and cried out unnoticed: “Ah, how were people created so terribly like this?” Because in the first instance I did not know that they were in famine and that they were starved until they had reached that lean state. And they were so starved that the breasts of the women had dried up. The king, too, was so bitterly starved that he was unable to put on his crown whenever he went out. It was a great pity that the hunger had forced the people of the town not to respect the king or chiefs again, except one who brought food to them.

According to the custom of that town, I was first taken to the king, and when he approved of my staying there, then I lodged in the house of the paramount chief, which was almost next to the palace of the king. When it was night I tried to sleep, but I was unable to fall asleep because of hunger. So in the morning I went to the king and told him: “Please, King, I am badly hungry, will you give me something to eat now?”

But he said at the same time, “Is that so? Sorry, we have been in great famine these past few years, and therefore I have no food to give you except cold water, which is our main food in this town at present!”

Then I went back to my room. I sat and I was expecting that the paramount chief would soon send food to me as the king had failed to give it to me. I waited for many hours and yet he did not send anything to me. Then I went to him. Without shame, I told him that I wanted to eat, but he said that their main food was cold water. He said furthermore that the famine was so serious that they had money, but it was useless. They had plenty of costly clothes, but the hunger did not let them wear them, and even the clothes were oversized on them because they had become too lean. And again, this paramount chief advised me that I should be drinking the cold water.

Then, having now heard the same from him, without hesitation I started to drink the cold water. It was not yet daybreak when I was woken by hunger in the following morning I had hardly got up when I went to the king’s attendants. I complained to them again that since I had come to the town I had nothing to eat except cold water, which I was drinking. I complained to them perhaps they might help me, but I was very surprised that they did not allow me to tell them all of my complaints, for they interrupted immediately after they heard the word “hunger” from me. They stripped themselves naked and told me to look how every one of them had become lean. They told me further that I, too, would soon become bones if I kept longer in that town.

Having failed again to get food from the attendants, I shook my head with surprise before I left them. When I returned to my room, I sat down quietly and I began to think how to get food by all means. I first thought to go back to my village, to bring foodstuffs to this town for sale. But I remembered that my village was too far away from there, and again, there was no real road on which to travel anyway.

As I was still suggesting within myself of what to do, it came to my mind to go to the big river which was near this town; perhaps I might get fishes from there. Without hesitation, I went to that river. Luckily, I found many canoes tied up to the trees on the bank and I loosened one. I put my machete in it and then I pushed it on the river. I started to find fishes about to kill, but there was none to be found. Of course, as I was still paddling along, I came to the swampy bush at about twelve o’clock noon. In that swampy bush there were many palm trees. When I stopped the canoe I climbed one palm tree, but unfortunately there was no fruits on it. But, when I climbed the third one, I found two ripened bunches of palm fruits on top of it. So, I drove all the birds which were eating them away first, and then I cut both bunches down.

After I had put them in the canoe, I first ate of them to my satisfaction and then I took the rest to the town. I was nearly torn into pieces by the hungry people as I was carrying them along in the town to the king. However, I carried them to the king at last. With great wonder and admiration, he took them from me and thanked me greatly. Having eaten as many fruits as he could, he then distributed the rest to his people.

After the people had gone back to their houses, the king invited me to one of his property rooms. He showed me all his money and many other treasures as gold, silver, costly beads and diamonds. He promised me that if I could get such palm fruits for him and his people until when the famine was finished, he would give me a lot of money, gold, silver, diamond and beads as rewards. Having promised me like that, I replied with a smile that I would try my best to supply him with fruits until when the famine was finished, and then I went back to my room in the paramount chief’s house.

In the following morning I went to the river again. I tried all my efforts in climbing so many palm trees. Luckily, after a while, I got one bunch of palm fruits and I brought it to the king. After he had eaten of the fruits to his satisfaction, he distributed the rest to his people. It was so I brought the fruits to the king and his people for a period of five months. But unfortunately, as the famine was not stopped in time and the season of the palm fruits came to an end, I could not get anything for the king anymore. I tried all my best to get the fruit, but it was in vain.

When it was the third day that I had not eaten, except to drink the cold water from morning till night, I was so weak that I thought that I would die soon. I thought of going back to my village that time, but I could not trek the distance of about one mile without falling down. This, my fourth journey, was so bad and hopeless that I said within myself that if I returned to my village this time, I would never attempt to go for any treasure again.

Having failed in all my efforts to get food, then I went back to the palm trees, thinking perhaps I might get some fruits which probably had fallen to the bottom of the palm trees during the season. So I started to search the bottom of every palm tree and I found only one over-ripened fruit when it was about three o’clock in the afternoon. I hastily picked it up. But, as I held it, I said to myself sorrowfully, “What could a single palm fruit do for me?” It could not satisfy my hunger.

Anyhow, I went back to the canoe. As I was paddling it along on the river I came to the deepest part of it, when this palm fruit mistakenly fell into the water. This affected me so badly that I threw the paddle into the canoe and then jumped in the water without hesitation. But as I was swimming here and there just to pick up the fruit, someone held both my feet and was pulling me down into the bottom of the river. Having tried all my best to take my feet from him and failed, I left myself to him. After a while he pulled me into the water, and it was then I saw who was pulling me. He held one coffin with his left hand. The lid of that coffin was glass, and he had hardly pushed that lid to one side when he pushed me in it, and he entered it as well and then covered it with that glass lid at the same time. As I was inside the coffin with him, I was breathing in and out quite easily, and I saw plainly that this man had covered his body from the knee to the waist with the leather of a big fish. He had no hair on his head but small scales instead. His arms were very short and were as strong as iron, but there were fingers on each arm and they were resembled those of a human being. Although he had two eyes like myself, each was as round as the full moon.

To my fear, he had fins on his shoulders, elbows, knees and ankles, and there were a number of moustache hairs on his upper jaw, which was that of a big fish. His mouth was flat but his nose was round. As the coffin was taking us deeply into the river, this man began to threaten me badly. Sometimes he would scratch my face with his sharp nails, sometimes he would slap me on the ear, and sometimes he would be frightening by pointing a sharp iron at my eyes. It was like that he ill-treated me until the coffin took us to the bottom of the river. Then he pushed the lid of the coffin to one side, came down, and then pulled me out. When I came out, I noticed that we were on land and not in the water as before. The river could be seen no more. Then he pushed me in front of him and told me to walk along on one road, which led to a very beautiful house. As I was going along, he was following me as fast as he could.

On both sides of that road there were beautiful trees and flowers. Having travelled on that road for a while I saw several men similar to this one. They lined up on both sides of the road as if they were policemen or soldiers. Having travelled farther, we came to the front of that beautiful house, and it was then I saw clearly that it was a mighty palace. As he was escorting me along in it and as we were going from one place to another, I saw the costly decorations which were hung on every corner. Again, I noticed that the sun was so dull that there was only little difference from the full moon of the dry season. The air was a little thicker than my village’s air and the sands on the ground were as white as white cloth. The sky was almost cloudy throughout the day.

After a while, that man escorted me to a beautiful sitting-room in which one beautiful lady sat in royal state. Without hesitation I stood before her and bowed down, as the man who had escorted me in stood at the back. After I stood for a few minutes, I simply walked to one of the seats and then sat on it. I had hardly crossed my legs when I started to glance at the decorations which were on the walls and on the floor. Now it was revealed to me that the inhabitants of this town were the water people and that beautiful lady was the nymph of that river, so they belonged to the fish race. The nymph and her attendants and guardsmen were very surprised, as I was not afraid of them at all, but they did not know that I had surrendered myself to all that might happen to me at that time.

The decorations on the walls were stuffed goldfishes, polished large seashells, skulls of the sea animals, etc., and every part of those walls was twinkling like stars. The seats were also stuffed fishes and were as fresh as if they were still alive. The ruler, the nymph herself, was dressed in the skins of beautiful fishes. The skins were so highly refined that they were as smooth as very costly clothes. Some were shining like gold, some were twinkling like bright stars, and the top ones were shining steadily like diamonds. She sat on an armchair which had many carved sea creatures on top. She stretched her feet out on a well-polished skull of a big whale. Many big sea tortoises were walking about on the floor and the crown on her head was full of small, beautiful seashells.

As far as I saw her, she was about thirty years old. Her eyes were very clear and her face was as fresh as the face of a fifteen-year-old girl. There were no scars or pimples on her cheeks or face and the hair of her head was not very dark, but, of course, probably the climate of that town had turned her hair like that. Her teeth were very white and very close to each other. Her nose was quite pointed, like that of an image. The slippers on her feet were made from the soft leather of a crocodile. She had a clear and lovely voice and her face always seemed as if she was kind and merciful.

As I was still noticing all these things, another set of guardsmen walked in, and those whom I met in there walked out and those who had just come in took over the duty. Again, I noticed with this new set of the guardsmen that every one of them was a man of strong body, stout and fearful to see. The skull of a shark was on everyone’s head, and they wore aprons which were made from the skin of a fish, and the scaly skins of fishes were their purtises and gloves. Many of them held the tails of big fishes. Each of the tails was about four feet long and the width was about six inches and very thick indeed, and sharp thorns were lined up on both edges. Some of those who held long spears shielded their breasts with very big sea tortoise back shells. These were their uniforms. Every one of them was giant-like and cynical.

As I sat on the chair facing the nymph, the queen of the river, I was still looking at the decorations and thinking also that no doubt I would leave this town with much wealth, the man who had brought me in there started to complain to the nymph that he brought me before her for punishment, because I struck his head when I jumped in the river when the only palm fruit which I could find had fallen into the river. That man had hardly complained to the nymph when all her guardsmen gathered at my back, ready to hold me. But the nymph hastily rang the bell on her side, asking them to leave me. Then with a very cool voice, she asked me, “Why did you strike him on the head?”

So, before I started to reply, I first crossed my feet and sat very easy, as if I was in my house, and then I said, “In fact, I jumped in the river when the only palm fruit that I could get had fallen in the water. I did not know whether I had struck him on the head, but if it was so then it was by mistake.”

She asked again, “Why did you jump into the river in pursuit of one palm fruit?” And those guardsmen were at attention and ready to hold me if the nymph gave them the order to do so.

So I replied, “My work was to find the palm fruits for the people of the town of famine because they had nothing to eat, since the famine had started in their town and they had already leaned to bones.”

When she heard the likes of that from me, she was so wonderful that she sat up and then asked again, “The famine was so serious that the people could only eat the palm fruits?”

I said, “Yes. Even the palm fruits were not easy to get.”

Then she and her guardsmen breathed out with wonder, and as she hesitated and was looking at me, the guardsmen looked at each other’s eyes with great wonder and then stood at ease. That showed me that they were in sympathy with me. So the nymph said suddenly, “Oh, no wonder, your appearance even shows that you are in a great famine because you are too lean.”

But I hastily interrupted, “That town is not mine, but I went there to find treasure.”

As she was about to ask me another question, one beautiful lady walked in that moment. She put one big basin in front of her and then she bowed down for the nymph and walked out. When the nymph removed the lid of that basin, it was roasted fish, and then she started to eat it as a refreshment. But I was very hungry, even before I was brought to her, so I stood up and walked to her, and without excuse I took some slices and then I walked back to my seat, and there I started to eat the fish bit by bit with greediness. Since the nymph was kind and merciful, she rang the bell at her side and after a few seconds one attendant walked in. Then she told her to take me to the dining room and give me food. So I walked out with that attendant. The attendant gave me the nice food, which I ate to my entire satisfaction. After that I went back to the nymph. Having discussed with me the famine for a while, she stood up and walked into one room opposite that sitting room. After a while she came back with one round box. It was very big, but one man could carry it from one place to another. It was sealed around. She gave it to me and then explained to me that, “This sealed box, ” she pointed finger to it “ will supply food and drinks of all kinds to you and the people of the town of famine throughout the period of the famine. But you and the people must be very careful not to break the delicate box. If you break it, it will not be able to supply anything to you anymore and all of you will be punished for it. Furthermore, if it is stolen away from you, all of you will be punished as well. And again, you must put in your mind always that you must not come back to me for anything as of today!”

Having warned me like that, she rang the bell and the water-man who had brought me to her walked in. As he stood before her, she told him to take me back to where he had caught me. Then I put the box on head. I thanked her greatly before I followed the water-man; some of the guardsmen led us a short distance before they went back. After a while we came to where that coffin was. Having put that box in it, I went inside the coffin. The water-man pushed it onto the river and then he entered it. To my surprise, he hardly covered it with its lid when the coffin started to run furiously on the water, and within a few seconds it floated to the very part of that river from which he had caught me before.

My canoe was still driven here and there by the tides. Then, as soon as the coffin stopped closely to it, I put that box in it and then I started to paddle it along to the town of famine. The water-man did not talk to me until when he had brought me back to that river and returned to the nymph.

When I paddled the canoe for about two hours I reached the bank of that river. Having tied up the canoe, I carried the box directly to the king. In the presence of the paramount chief the king removed the lid. To their surprise, they met several basins of a variety of food and one small spoon in it. But they did not believe me when I told them that the food would be sufficient to feed the whole people until whenever the famine was finished.

Anyhow, the king put the box in his strong-room and he chose me to be serving the food to the people and to himself. I first served him and the paramount chief until they had satisfied their hunger, and then the whole people in the town were invited to the palace. The king told them that every one of them should go back to his or her house and bring a plate and spoon. Then the people ran back to their houses, and they returned with all these things after a few minutes. Then I began to serve each of them. The people ate and drank to their satisfaction, and yet the food and the drinks remained in that box as if I had not served from it.

It was so the people and the king were eating and drinking to their satisfaction for three times daily for three months, and yet the food and the drinks remained as if nothing had touched them. And within a few weeks more, the people had forgotten the famine. They had enough muscles on bodies that they became as powerful as before the famine had started. They were able to walk about easily in the town, singing, dancing and laughing with great joy. They were so satisfied that they determined not to work again for their living.

But news of that wonderful box had spread to many towns and villages and many people from those towns and villages had come to witness that box. So one midnight, a gang of night marauders came from one of those towns to the palace. When they came in and as they were trying to break and enter into the strong-room to steal the box away to their town, the king’s bugle-blowers, who were keeping watch of the gate of the palace, started to blow their bugles to wake the king and the other people in the palace. When the people and the king woke, they took clubs, cudgels, machetes, axes, bows and arrows, etc. They rushed to the marauders and I followed them with my machete in my hand. Then all of us started to beat them, but they beat us so mercilessly in return that everyone got wounds all over their bodies. They beat me until I fell down unconscious. Every part of my body was bleeding continuously. But, at last, when the arrows were shot to them continuously for a few minutes then they ran away for their lives.

After the marauders had escaped, the king and some of the other people took me from the floor to one room. The king started to treat my wounds with medicine and all were healed within a few days. The marauders did not attempt to come to the palace for some weeks, but one of them whom we did not recognize at all came to the bugle-blowers. He tried all his possible best and made friends with them. He was so kind to them that they did not suspect him as one of the marauders. He was sitting with them from morning until evening. He was just spying the easiest way to get into the strong-room, in which the wonderful box was kept.

Having satisfied himself, then he went back to his fellows and told them to be ready for another attempt to steal the box. In the very night that they were coming, he had come to the bugle-blowers before his marauders. He was playing with them as he was usually doing but he hid one bottle of thick honey under his dress. When he noticed that the bugle-blowers went to the palace to take their supper, he hastily filled their bugles with that thick honey and then hung them back on their usual rack before they came back.

When they returned, he ate and drank with them, and after that he told them that he was going to visit another man in the next house. They did not know that immediately after he had left them, he went directly to the other marauders. He told them that it was time to go and burgle the strong-room. Then all of them came to the town and entered the palace through the other gate. As they were splitting the door of the strong-room with axes, the bugle-blowers woke and hastily took their bugles from the rack. But, when they put them in their mouths to blow them as a warning to the king and the people in the palace that the night marauders came again, the thick honey started to run from their bugles into their mouths. Therefore, they were unable to blow the bugles, but instead they were licking the honey and enjoying it as it was running into their mouths. It was so the marauders were breaking into the strong-room as hastily as they could.

It was like that the room was broken into and the wonderful box, together with the king’s property, was taken, and then they left the town as quickly as possible. They had gone far away before the bugle-blowers were able to blow their bugles after they had licked the honey in their bugles. Anyhow, the king and the other people took up their weapons. Then we chased the marauders to catch them and take the box back from them, but they had gone too far away, and we did not see any trace of them.

Then we came back to the palace, the king sat down on his throne and was thinking sorrowfully of what to eat in the morning. In the morning, when the people gathered in the front of the palace and were waiting for their breakfast, the king and his paramount chief told me to go back to the nymph for another wonderful box, but I explained to the king that the nymph had warned me already not to come back to her for anything, and had warned me as well that if the box was split or stolen away, we would be punished for it. The hungry people shouted all at once “Don’t tell us a lie! You must go back to her, and if you explain to her how the box was stolen from the strong-room, she would not refuse to give you another one!” Again, I insisted not to go back, but that time the king and the paramount chief said that if I refused to go back to the nymph, it meant I disobeyed their order, and therefore they would punish me, and the punishment was to behead me.

Anyhow, I went back to that river, and as I was paddling the canoe along I came to the same spot from where the water-man had taken me to the nymph the other day. Then I willfully threw the paddle in the water with the hope that it would sink like that palm fruit, when the paddle did not sink, I jumped into the water. I had hardly dived in when the same water-man held both my feet and pulled me deeply into the water before he put me inside the same coffin, and within a few minutes it took us to the town of the nymph. Then the water-man took me before her like the first time. He complained to her that he caught me again when I struck his head with my feet.

But the nymph grew annoyed when she saw me there again. Instead of saying anything to the complaint of the water-man, she asked me, “Had I not told you last time not to come here again?”

I replied with a trembling voice, “In fact you had told me not to come to you again. But, I come back to take another wonderful box in which everlasting food and drinks are kept!”

Having heard that from me, she became more angry and asked, “By the way, what has happened to the one which I had given to you the other day?” I replied that the night marauders had stolen it away from the king’s strong-room a few days ago. Then she remarked with fearful voice, “Is that how you people are, careless? I had warned you that you should keep the box so safely that it might not be stolen. All right, I shall send another thing to the king which will teach all of you sense!”

Then she stood up and entered the same room opposite the sitting-room as before. I was very happy when she told me that she would send another thing to us which would teach us sense. After a while, she returned with one huge sealed pot. When gave it to me, she told me that I should open it when the whole people and the king gathered into one place. Then I thanked her greatly, for I believed that this pot was going to supply the food and drinks like that box. So when I was ready to leave, she rang the bell for the same water-man and he walked in at the same time. As he bowed down for her, she told him to take me back with the same coffin. Having taken me back to where he had caught me, I put the pot in my canoe and I paddled it to the bank, and from there I carried the pot to the town.

The hungry people and the king, who had already gathered in the front of the palace and were waiting for my return, shouted greatly with joy when they saw the pot on my head. When I gave it to the king and he put it in the middle of the people, I told him how he should open it. So he first told the people to bring their plates nearer and then he forced it open.

But an uncountable number of bees, wasps and all kinds of stinging insects rushed out from it instead of food and drinks. Without hesitation, these insects started to sting all of us. Within a few minutes many people were stung to death, and that place was disordered all at once. Everyone was running skelter-helter for his or her life. And at last, as the king was running away for his life, the crown fell off from his head, but he was unable to wait and take it back. So, almost all the people of the town of famine had run away for their lives. When the town was empty, then I took my gun, hunting-bag and machete and I started to go back to my village. I could not wait to tell the king to fulfill his promise, but, of course, he too was nowhere to be found.

After a few days’ travel, I reached my village and I entered my father’s house very quietly, but not as joyfully as my last three journeys which had profited me greatly. Then the people rushed to my house to honour my return, but they were greatly shocked when they noticed that I did not bring anything this time. Having told them all what had happened to me in the town of famine, some cautioned me not to go on any journey again, and some advised me not to give up my adventures because time was not always as straight as a straight line and that one who was finding goodness about must endanger his life and must be able to endure all hardships as well. Then I thanked them greatly. After that I sent for drinks and all of us drank together until midnight.

“That was the end of my fourth journey. So many journeys were not profitable in those days. One journey might prove to be a better one at the beginning but might be the worst towards the end. But, I was not discouraged at all, as my fourth journey was vanity at last. I thank you for your listening. Good night to you all.” Then after the people of my village had danced, sung and drunken for a few minutes, they went back to their houses.





AJANTALA, THE NOXIOUS GUEST




Once there lived in a village, a hunter, who had a wife. When she was under pregnancy, old people of the village warned the husband, “It is time now for you to suspend killing bush animals, for if you continue to do so you will kill the baby that your wife is going to deliver when it is time, and she will deliver of a terrible creature in the form of a baby when it is time for her to deliver.”

“That is a superstition,” the hunter said after the people had gone back to their houses.

Other hunters used to stop killing animals entirely except after their wives had delivered, so that they might not kill their wives’ babies who had changed to the form of bush animals, and after that went to the bush.

When it was the time, the wife of this hunter delivered a male baby.

“Ha! Ha! Ha! This is how the world is! What did I come for then? I thought this world would be as beautiful as the heaven from where I came! Look at everything how it is very dirty! Of course, I will not keep long before I will go back to heaven!” the baby immediately exclaimed, as he came down from his mother’s womb.

Having said that, he stood up from the blood and was walking with trembling feet along to his mother’s room.

“Ha! Look at the baby, he stood and walked at the same time he was born!” the whole people of the house exclaimed with embarrassment.

“Heigh! I have never seen a woman birth such a terrible baby as this one!” said the mother painfully.

And the baby took the sponge and soap and he washed all the blood away from his body. After that, he wrapped his body with one of his mother’s clothes, and then he sat upright on a very high stool and was looking at everyone with his ungrateful eyes.

“Ha! I am badly hungry for food; what can I eat now?” Then he started to sniff the sweet smell of the food which was inside the room nearest to his mother’s room. “Yes, I am glad. I shall get better food from this room; I better go in now.”

Without bearing fear from all the people’s eyes, which were opened wildly with wonder, he stood up and entered the room. He ate the whole food, that which had been prepared for twenty or more persons. After that, he kicked all the plates and pots and they all broke into pieces. Having done all that, he came out and sat down in the middle of the people, who were looking on with their withered lips and hands.

“Good evening to you, mother of the newly born baby! Thanks to the god who has helped you deliver safely. Hope you have not any complaint after birth?” The people of the village had heard the news of the baby within one hour, and they came to greet the mother and see how the baby was.

“There is not any complaint at all and thanks to the god for that, but…” replied the unhappy mother.

“Doubtless, this is not a real baby, but a spirit of one of the animals which his father, the hunter, had killed,” the people were saying on their way when returning to their houses.

In the morning of the seventh day after he was born, several old people gathered in his father’s parlour, just to give him a name, for that must be done, though he was terrible.

The baby walked by himself and sat in the middle of the people, and he was looking at everyone’s eyes as they were praying. “Long live the baby, and—”

But to their horror, when they were about to announce the name which his father, the hunter, wished the old people to give him, the baby himself announced loudly, “My name is AJANTALA and there is no need to give me another name after this.”

The people sighed and mumbled with wonder. Then some honey, a large quantity of alligator pepper, drinks as palm wine, guinea-corn wine, plantain wine, and corn wine, and plenty of bitter kolas were brought before the people, for all these must be served at the naming ceremony.

But, when they were about to start to eat the kolas, etc. and drink the drinks, Ajantala jumped high unexpectedly and pierced one of the people with a sharp iron. When he turned to another man to pierce that one, again, the people rushed outside. All were running away as hastily as they could, and he chased them and beat them a short distance before he came back to the house.

“There is no wonder, the baby, Ajantala, must be a terrible spirit of a wild animal. Of course, we had forewarned his father to stop to killing animals, except after his wife had delivered, but he did not pay heed to the warning, and this is the result now,” the people were saying about in the village.

“Oh, yes! This is a thick, long stick.” Ajantala took it from the ground. He slammed the door and began to flog his father and the rest of the family with the stick so severely that all of them did not know the right time of day until they forced the door open and then ran away. Of course, he did not touch his mother.

“What is more to do? Yes, there are still many more things to do.” Having remembered what was the next thing to do, he took an ax and started to cut down the wall.

“Ha! Stop that,” his mother warned him.

“Oh! Which means you too have no sense? All right, I shall teach you good sense now, as I have taught the others.”

And he gave his mother seven slaps on the face.

“Ah! Ajantala, you are a cruel boy, and you are slapping your mother,” exclaimed a man who stood outside. He had hardly finished in saying so when Ajantala left his mother. He jumped from the veranda to the outside and he gave seven slaps to that man.

“Ha! Ajantala, stop that!” another man who stood nearby exclaimed. But to everyone’s surprise, immediately after that man exclaimed “Ha!” Ajantala cut his mouth open to his nape.

Now Ajantala became so fearful that the whole people of the village shunned to go near his father’s house, and his mother had nearly died for all the troubles given to her.

At last, one morning, she took Ajantala to a very far bush. She gave him plenty of sweet fruits.

“Please, Ajantala, stand near this tree and wait there until I come back and take you to the village, for I am now going farther in this bush to fetch our food.” And by a trick, she left him there and came back to the village.

“Where is Ajantala?” his father asked softly.

“I have left the terrible boy in the bush.”

“And he agreed to stay there?” the father wondered.

“Yes, he agreed, by my trick,” responded the mother.

“I thank you for that. You see, it is helpful sometime to pay heed to the old people’s warning.”

“What do you mean by saying so, my dear?” his wife asked calmly.

“The meaning is that several old people had warned me to stop killing bush animals during the period you were under pregnancy, and Ajantala is the result of the warning, and. I do believe he is one of the animals which I had killed during the period of your pregnancy.”

“Ho-o-o! No wonder!” she discovered the reason why Ajantala was acting like that, and then she believed that he was not a human.

Ajantala waited, waited, waited, and waited under that tree, but his mother did not return to him. He was wandering about in that bush and was looking for his mother until he had traveled to the heart of the bush and came to a small house which was built there. A corn farm surrounded the house, and both the house and the farm belonged to three brothers. Their names were Goat, Lion, and Ram, who was the oldest. They were human beings in those days and were living together in comfort in that house.

“Good day, sirs,” Ajantala walked zigzag into the house and saluted the three brothers, who were sitting and enjoying their leisure hours at the time he met them.

“Hello, good day, boy!” Mr. Ram returned the salutation while the other two were looking at Ajantala and expecting what he wanted to say.

“Please, sirs, I am a wayfarer, and I cannot reach my destination today, and probably not even in two weeks. Therefore, I shall be grateful indeed if you will allow me to stay here with you as your guest for a few days only, before I will continue my journey,” Ajantala asked for this obligation with due respect, as if he was a good boy.

“Of course, we may have mercy on you to let you stay with us for the few days you ask for, though you are very young,” Mr. Ram said on behalf of the rest.

“Thanks, sirs, and God.” Ajantala prostrated.

So, he was allowed to stay with them. He was eating and doing everything with them.

Having seen this luxurious living, a few days later, Ajantala asked, “Please, sirs, I want to discontinue my journey and be a servant for you. I shall comply with all of your orders.” And these three brothers agreed.

The following morning, Ajantala followed Mr. Goat to the farm to fetch their food. Having collected plenty of fruits into the basket, Mr. Goat told Ajantala to carry it.

“Oh! What do you say now, Mr. Goat?” And Mr. Goat repeated what he had told him to do.

“Ho! Ho! Ho! Is that what you mean to do? All right, I shall teach you sense now.” And Mr. Goat was looking at him with the thought that Ajantala was so small that he could not do him any harm.

Ajantala walked like a crab for a short distance. He came back with a handful of dust and he threw it into Mr. Goat’s eyes suddenly. As Mr. Goat was staggering about for help, Ajantala struck him at the forehead with a heavy stone and then knocked him down. A large quantity of blood was dropping down from Mr. Goat’s head.

After a while, Ajantala helped Mr. Goat to stand up, and he put the basket on Mr. Goat’s head.

As they were going along the way to the house, Ajantala warned Mr. Goat not to tell the rest what had happened to him at the farm. Willing or not, Mr. Goat agreed; otherwise he would harm him more severely than that.

“Ah! Mr. Goat, what has happened to your head and eyes at the farm?” the rest asked when he and Ajantala entered the house.

“It was a big stone that fell upon my head,” Mr. Goat replied and rubbed away the blood with his hand.

The following day, it was Mr. Ram’s turn to go to the same farm for food. Ajantala followed him and he did the same to Mr. Ram. And so he did the same to Mr. Lion the day that he followed him to the farm.

These three brothers became fed up to be living with Ajantala, for he was too terrible and powerful for them.

One night, when Ajantala had gone to bed—they did not know that he never fell asleep—Mr. Ram first said, “I am afraid Ajantala is a noxious guest, and if we don’t find one way or the other now to escape, one day he will kill all of us.”

“Certainly, he will kill all of us one day,” Mr. Goat supported. “But I suggest that the best thing to do now is to pack all our belongings and leave this house tomorrow morning. I am sure, before he will wake, we should go as far as to a place that he will not be able to trace us out,” Mr. Lion suggested quietly.

“Yes, you are right, Mr. Lion, and it will be better if we pack our belongings and food into one basket now, and by five o’clock in the morning leave here,” said the other two.

At the same time, they packed all their belongings into one basket and put plenty of food in it, which they would eat on their way.

Having done that, they went to bed and slept. But, Ajantala, who had heard all of their discussions, stood up cautiously, wrapped himself with dried broad leaves, and put himself at the bottom of the basket.

By five o’clock, these three brothers woke up, then Mr. Goat put the basket on his head and all left that house. They thought that they had saved themselves from Ajantala who was in the basket.

Having traveled about for miles, they came to a tree and stopped under it to rest for some minutes.

“Eh! We leave our lovely house today and Ajantala will occupy the rest of our things,” said painfully Mr. Lion.

“Were you not the one who had agreed to Ajantala staying with us?” Mr. Ram said.

“Ha! I was not the one, but Mr. Goat was,” Mr. Lion denied.

“Yes, you were the one, Mr. Lion, I believe,” Mr. Goat supported.

“Ha! Ha! Ha! Not me at all, but you were the one, Mr. Lion,” exclaimed Mr. Goat.

“Shut up there, Mr. Goat, I am quite sure you were the one,” roared Mr. Lion.

“Ha! Ha! Ha! Don’t tell a lie against me, Mr. Lion.”

“I say shut up your mouth, and if you don’t admit now that you were the one, I shall kill you and eat your body at once, especially now that I am badly hungry for meat,” Lion roared again.

“All right, if I was the one who had approved Ajantala’s request to be with us, let this ground on which we stand now split, and then swallow me. But if I was not the one, let something bring Ajantala to us now to scatter all of us.”

Mr. Goat hardly finished this curse when Ajantala jumped out of the basket, and they could not even glance at him when they scattered in different directions out of fear.

Mr. Lion escaped to the forest while Messrs. Goat and Ram escaped to the village, and then became domestic animals from that day.

It was from that day they became enemies of each other. And that is the reason the lion kills the goat or ram whenever it sees one of them, for the lie they had told against him in the past.

Thus Ajantala separated the three brothers.





THE PALM-WINE TAPPER AND THE STRANGE FELLOWS




Akiti and Tort the Shell-man were natives of a town called Eleegun. Akiti was -a good palm tapper. His palm wine was of the best quality in town. Because of this, his wine would not stay long in the palm wine bar when the drinkers rushed in and bought it all. Though the drinkers rushed to buy his wine and he was happy about this, he was not satisfied with the low price which they paid for him. It was far below his expectations.

Akiti had one son, named Ireti, and some daughters. They were still too young at that time to pay heed to his profession.

Akiti continued to tap the best quality of palm wine for the drinkers. One morning, as he descended from one palm tree, holding one pitcher full of wine in his left hand and climbing ropes and knife in the right hand, a strange fellow appeared in front of him unexpectedly. Akiti greeted the strange fellow and then he moved to go and climb the next palm tree. The fellow stopped him and he spoke to him politely, “My friend, shall I introduce myself to you first?”

“Yes, with pleasure,” Akiti replied in a hurried voice with fear. “You can!”

“I am not a man of this earth, you know, but of the world beyond, and I have dressed in human skin for coming to you!”

“What? Are you one of the dead from heaven?” Akiti hastily dropped the pitcher and his tapping knife in his hands on to the ground and asked with great fear.

“Of course, I am from heaven, and I am sent to you in this form by my fellows!” the strange fellow explained in a thin voice.

“By your fellows? But where are they?” Akiti asked in fear as he prepared to flee.

“But my friend, don’t be afraid,” said the strange fellow calmly as he pulled Akiti back. “You see,” he continued, “I simply put on this human skin so that you may not fear me! My fellows are not like the people of this earth,” the fellow went further, “but we, the fellows of the world beyond, have been drinking from your extraordinary palm wine for some time, and we cannot get a sufficient supply to satisfy us.”

“Is that so?” Akiti inquired with wonder.

“It is so,” continued the strange fellow. “Being we are not getting sufficient supply of your wine, my fellows sent me to bargain with you. You should stop supplying the wine to your customers, the drinkers, and supply to us only. We shall be paying a higher price than that which the drinkers are paying you.”

“Are you sure that you will be paying a higher price for me?” Akiti asked sharply, squinting at the strange fellow.

“Certainly,” the strange fellow confirmed with a smile. “Do you agree to be supplying us with palm wine every day?”

“I agree, but I am afraid,” Akiti explained, “to carry it to you in your world beyond. Of course,” Akiti continued hastily, “I don’t know the road to your world beyond!”

“Not at all,” replied the strange fellow. “You will put all the wine inside this huge pot, which is under the tree over there.” He pointed his hand to the pot, and Akiti looked in that direction and he saw the pot there.

“When you have collected the palm wine into the pot,” continued the fellow, “then you will put a number of pieces of small stones on the cover of the pot, and those small stones will indicate how many pounds you intend to take for your wine. For instance, if you put ten pieces of small stones on the cover, we shall put ten pounds there for you. This means the number of small stones you may put there will be the number of pounds we shall put there!”

“Okay, I agree to your terms. But when shall I start filling the palm wine inside your huge pot?” Akiti asked with happiness.

“Please start putting the wine inside the pot as from today!” the strange fellow hastened Akiti. “Because we shall start to come to the pot and drink the wine this midnight. But, I warn you that you must return to your town as soon as you have filled up the pot with the palm wine because it is prohibited for the mankind to see us, even to spy us in our real form. That is why we choose midnight to come out. And we shall put your money on the cover of the huge pot each midnight that we come here to drink. Then when you come back in the morning to fill the pot with the wine, you will take your money. Do you agree to that?”

“I agree with happiness,” Akiti replied, smiling.

“But this is a serious secret between you and we, the strange fellows of the world beyond. You must not disclose to anyone that we come and drink the palm wine on your farm. And you too must not come and spy at us at midnight. This is very dangerous for you,” the strange fellow warned Akiti and then he vanished unexpectedly.

When the strange fellow had disappeared suddenly, Akiti breathed out heavily with fear and confusion. However, he started to fill up the huge pot with the best quality of palm wine from that day on, with happiness, for he believed that within a few months he would become a rich man in the town.

Having filled up the strange huge pot with the palm wine for that day, Akiti covered it with its cover, and then to indicate the cost of the wine for the strange fellows he put ten pieces of small stones on top of the cover. Having done all that, he went back to his town. And it was hardly midnight when the strange fellows of the world beyond came in great numbers to the huge pot. They first counted the number of the small stones which Akiti put on top of the cover of the pot, and there were ten in all.

Then they sat round the pot and started to enjoy themselves with the palm wine in it. After they had drunk the wine continuously for about one hour, they were so intoxicated by it that they stood up. They started to sing the song of the strange fellows of the world beyond, and they started to dance merrily round the huge pot. But as soon as they had drunk the whole wine, they covered the empty pot again. And, after they had put ten pounds on top of the pot, they returned to their world beyond before the darkness disappeared from the sky.

Hardly the morning sun had appeared in the sky when Akiti came to the huge pot. He was so happy when he met ten pounds on top of the pot that he hastily put it in his pocket and then he danced for some minutes. Now, Akiti was sure that each of the ten small stones was one pound.

Thus Akiti continued to tap the palm wine for those strange fellows and they left ten pounds on top of the pot each midnight that they came to drink. Within a few years Akiti had become a very rich man in the town, so rich that the rest of the people were confused about whether he had become a burglar.

Tort the Shell-man was among the people who were confused about Akiti’s riches, and as he was cunning, selfish, greedy, treacherous, merciless, and an expert tale-bearer, he assured the people of the town that he would find out the secret of Akiti’s riches.

Now, Tort the Shell-man started to go to Akiti’s house every day. He was helping him sharpen his tapping instruments and helping him fetch water from the stream. After a few days, Akiti was so impressed by Tort’s service that he took him to be his loyal bearer, and a good citizen who had changed from his bad behaviours to good behaviours.

But Tort, with his usual cunning, had only disguised himself to be a good citizen and a trustworthy bearer. So, Akiti allowed him to live in his house, and he was disclosing all his secrets to the Shell-man as if he were part of his family, but he did not tell him about the strange fellows, and he did not allow him to follow him to his palm tree farm.

As time went on, Akiti continued to tap the palm wine for the strange fellows, until one day Akiti became ill unexpectedly. The illness was so serious that he could not go to the farm and tap the wine for those strange fellows of the world beyond.

“Ah!” cried the cunning Tort. “This world is vanity. There is only temporary enjoyment in the world! Today is weeping! Tomorrow is happiness! After tomorrow is hisses! The day after tomorrow is a dance of joy, and after that of grief! I am fed up with the irregular life of this world! See now Akiti, who is feeding me and taking care of me. The sickness befalls him! Ah, what should I do now to help him out of his illness? Ah, ah, ah!” Thus Tort, the Shell-man, with his usual cunning, distorted his face and started to weep bitterly in front of Akiti, as if indeed he loved him heartily.

“Thank you, Tort. That is all right. I know that you love me truly, but don’t let my illness worry you. I shall be free from it soon. You hear?” Akiti comforted Tort. “Eh, please, Tort, call my son Ireti for me!” Akiti shouted.

“Here is Ireti!” Tort went out and he returned with Ireti.

“Here I am before you, my father. What can I do for you?” The son sat in front of his sick father, Akiti, and asked him quietly.

“You see, Ireti, Tort has stopped all of his bad characters completely. He is a nice faithful man now!”

“You mean this very Tort has become a faithful man, my father?” Ireti asked with laughter.

“Certainly, my son!” Akiti confirmed loudly.

“Not at all, my father. Tort’s bad behaviours are even getting worse and worse every day!”

“No, my son. Tort’s behaviours towards me have proved that he has become a good citizen!”

“Well, he might have changed to a faithful citizen, but I have not yet seen that in his behaviours, my father!” Ireti emphasized and shrugged.

“But I am no more a traitor or a villain!” Tort shouted and pretended to be annoyed.

“Do you hear him now? He has confirmed all I am just telling you about his changes! So, as he is no more a traitor or a villain or a criminal, I want him to go to my farm to help me tap the palm wine for the strange fellows of the world beyond!” Akiti disclosed his aim to Ireti.

“My father, don’t try to send Tort to your farm to tap wine for the strange fellows. Tort is also a busy-body!” Ireti warned his father aloud.

“Akiti, don’t listen to your son. Just tell me the road to your farm and I’ll tap the wine for the fellows as well as you have been doing!” Tort shouted as he scowled at Ireti angrily.

“Good of you, Tort the Shell-man. Look at that high mighty hill which is on the outskirts of the town. Do you see it?” Akiti stood up and he pointed at the hill through the window.

“Yes, yes, I see it, far away!” Tort peered at the hill and shouted.

“All right, when you go behind the hill you will see my farm there, about two kilometers from the hill. Then you will see one small pitcher on top of each of the palm trees. When you remove a pitcher, you will see that some quantity of the wine has flowed into the pitcher. Then you will pour the wine in it into the huge pot, which you will see under a tree near there. And it is so you will pour the wine which is inside of all the pitchers into the same huge pot. Having done so, then you will cover the pot with its cover. Then you will put ten pieces of small stones on top of the cover. You must not wait to see the strange fellows, but you should instead return to the town at once. Tort the Shell-man do not attempt to see the fellows because they will come to the huge pot at midnight to drink their palm wine. I warn you again!”

“Please go to the farm now and do the work for me!” Akiti did not pay heed to his son’s advice, but he instead sent Tort, the traitor and busy-body, to his farm.

Without hesitation, Tort took Akiti’s tapping instruments and went to the farm. As he was very smart, he climbed all the palm trees within a few hours. He poured the wine in each pitcher into the huge pot. Then he replaced each pitcher on top of each of the palm trees. After that he covered the huge pot with its cover and he put ten pieces of small stones on top of the cover.

But then Tort the Shell-man, instead of returning to town, lurked in the bush near the huge pot, in order to see those strange fellows of the world beyond.

“Has Tort returned from the farm, father?” Ireti entered the room and asked his father.

“He has not returned. I wonder why he has kept so long on the farm!” Akiti replied to his son with a throbbing heart.

“Hmmm. I am afraid Tort is very dangerous!” Ireti remarked to his father and he shook his head.

“But Tort has proved himself to have changed from bad to good!” Akiti doubted

“I am very sorry, father. Tort will wait on the farm to see with his eyes the strange fellows. I am sure of that!”

“But I have warned him seriously not to try to see them!” Akiti feared.

“Well, let us wait and see the outcome!” Ireti said and then he shrugged and walked outside of the house.

But Tort the Shell-man did not return, and instead he lurked in the bush near the huge pot, waiting to see what the strange fellows of the world beyond looked like. When it was midnight the fellows arrived with one drinking vessel in the hands of each of them. They sat around the huge pot and then they started to drink the palm wine greedily.

Now, Tort the Shell-man, from his lurking place, craned at the fellows and saw them clearly, but he was not self-aware when their horrible appearance aroused him, and so he shouted horribly and with derision at them. And as they had drunk so much that they were highly intoxicated, all of them stood up and were dancing drunkenly round the huge pot, with the fearful enchanted song of their own.

They then heard Tort’s shout and derision: “Aha-ah-a! I see you! You are too terrible and ugly for the human beings to look at! Hah! Those of you who are wobbled to one side! Those of you whose bodies are twisted! Those who have one foot and an oval head! Those of you with one eye! Those of you with mighty feet and with sharp horns on your heads! And so many of you are without ears! Hah! Eh! You all, the strange fellows of the world beyond, are really miscreated by your creator!” Tort shouted with derision and then he hastily crouched back into his lurking place.

“Who has seen us and scorned us bitterly like that?” one of those with a wobbled body shouted angrily. All of them stopped dancing suddenly, alert and in great anger.

“It must be Akiti, our tapper, who has spied us out and disdained us bitterly like that!” the rest replied angrily.

“Then let us search for him and catch him and then kill him at once, because I warned him that he should not wait and see us, but instead return to his town as soon as he had filled up our huge pot with the palm wine. Let us kill him now; otherwise he will tell our secret to all his people!” one of those with horns on head suggested angrily.

But as soon as Tort had heard that they wanted to kill him, he hastily escaped to the town before they started to search for him. Thus the strange fellows of the world beyond failed to kill Tort who they took as Akiti, their tapper.

They then returned to their world beyond with great anger, and they waited until they would get a good chance to do their worst to Akiti.

“Oh, Akiti, I am sorry that I have taken too long to return home as early as possible!” Tort, with his cunning, shouted immediately as he entered the house.

“But what has kept you so long on the farm?” Akiti shouted angrily.

“I believe, when I was returning to the house, the faster I trekked the longer the road became!” Tort deceived Akiti.

“What are you telling me? The road became longer when you were returning to the house?” Akiti was astonished.

“Certainly, the road became longer!” Tort confirmed his lie.

“My father, let me tell you, Tort has left trouble for you on the farm. I am quite sure of that!” Akiti’s son, Ireti hinted to his father aloud.

“But Tort, tell me the truth. Have you spied on those strange fellows?” Akiti turned to Tort and asked with fear.

“That is not true! If I waited and spied on the fellows, it means that I have belittled myself to you. It means I am treacherous and I am a traitor and a merciless villain, as the people have taken me to be!” Tort confirmed what he was.

“Well, I shall know everything which you have done on the farm when I go there in three days’ time, or as soon as I am well,” Akiti hissed and remarked confusedly.

But before three days passed, Akiti was already well. As he was preparing to go to the farm, his son Ireti saw him. He told him that he would accompany him to the farm to help him tap the wine, because Ireti was indeed afraid that Tort the Shell-man had spied on the strange fellows, although his father had warned him not to spy on them. But Akiti refused his son to accompany him to the farm; for he was afraid that Ireti was so young that he would attempt to spy on those fellows.

However, when Ireti was sure that his father would not allow him to follow him to the farm, he put a little quantity of ashes in his father’s farm-satchel. Having done so, then he split the bottom of the satchel a bit to allow the ashes drop on to the ground little by little. Then he hid himself in one corner of the house, and from there he kept watching for when his father would leave the house for his farm.

When Akiti got ready to leave, he simply hung his farm-satchel on his shoulder with his tapping instruments. Then he left the house without suspecting that his son had split the bottom of his satchel and put the ashes there. But, when Akiti was trekking along on the road to his farm, the ashes began to spill along the road, and thus the ashes gave a visible trail behind him.

One hour after Akiti had left the house, Ireti left the house as well. He followed the trail of the ashes until he came to the farm. But since he did not want his father to see him, he hid himself in a small bush, which was near the huge pot in which his father used to fill the palm wine for the strange fellows. That was how Ireti traced the visible trail to his father’s farm.

Then Ireti kept looking at his father as Akiti was climbing one palm tree to the top and then another, tapping the palm wine. Ireti was hiding or lurking in that small bush so that he might rescue his father from death, because he was sure that the strange fellows would definitely come to kill his father that morning, in reaction to Tort’s misbehaviour which had affected them a few days ago.

Soon Akiti had filled up the huge pot with palm wine and he prepared to leave for the town. As a matter of fact, the strange fellows appeared unexpectedly. Without hesitation, two of them chased Akiti as he was running away for his life. As Ireti saw what was happening to his father, the two fellows dragged his father to the rest of them, who stood round the huge pot, and they were sulking in great anger.

Having forced Akiti to stand back on his feet, one of those with a wobbled body questioned him. “Why did you wait and spy on us a few days ago, despite you having been warned that mankind is banned from seeing us in our proper form?”

“I have not done so since when I started to tap the palm wine for you. More, I was ill for the past few days, so I could not come to the farm at all!” Akiti replied trembling.

“But who waited and shouted on us with disdain a few days ago?” the champion of the strange fellows shouted horribly.

“Perhaps the man who waited and shouted on you might be Tort the Shell-man, who I sent to tap the wine for you. I made such arrangement with Tort so that you could get the wine to drink until when I was well,” Akiti explained with fear as his son, Ireti, was watching him from his hiding place.

“By the way, who is this Tort the Shell-man you are often mentioning to us?” all the strange fellows shouted horribly.

“Tort the Shell-man is my fellow townsfolk and my close friend who I trust indeed, but Shell-man is his nickname. Though he is clever and cheerful, he has also been condemned by the whole people of the town, for he is cunning, selfish, treacherous, and cruel, and he is also an expert traitor, liar, trickster, extortioner, highway robber and terror of terrors, the worst who was ever born in our land. But, he had confessed to me that he had stopped all of these abnormal characters before I had befriended him. So for his confession, I sent him to tap the wine for you!” Akiti defended himself by revealing Tort’s abnormal bad characters to the strange fellows.

“Though your defense has amused us to have mercy on you, we find you guilty for knowing Tort the Shell-man, knowing that he has many abnormal bad characters and sending him to your farm to tap the palm wine for us,” the champion remarked angrily. “However”, continued the champion, “the sentence is quashed, and we will have mercy on you because you sent Tort to tap the wine for us in order to satisfy us when you were ill. Instead to of killing you mercilessly, you will wrestle with each of us. If you can knock each of us to death, that means you are fortunate and can continue to live on earth.”

“But, if any one of us knocks you down to death, then that is your fate. You will pass to the everlasting world beyond. You will not see your wife, children, and friends any longer. Do you agree to the terms, Akiti?” the champion of the strange fellows concluded, while the whole of them kept quiet to hear Akiti’s excuse.

“We the people of the earth are not stones, so we are liable to become sick any time. But, to let you have the wine to drink every midnight, I sent Tort to tap it for you,” Akiti reminded them once more.

“But I shall remind you now, Akiti, that ‘the parrot is the bird of the sea,’ is it not?” one of those oval-headed fellows reminded Akiti with a proverb.

“Yes, it is. ‘The kingfisher is the bird of the lagoon,’” Akiti replied in proverb.

“Oh-o-oh! You know that ‘when we eat and drink we must not forget our solemn promises,’ or not so, Akiti?” the oval-headed fellow brought Akiti’s promises back to his memory. This oval-headed fellow was the fellow who disguised himself as a human and came to Akiti, and he made the arrangement with him to tap the palm wine for all of them. But he had warned Akiti not to disclose their secret to anybody and Akiti promised him that day that he would not. And now Akiti had let Tort known the secret of the strange fellows of the world beyond, though not by his own will, and he would be punished.

“I agree to wrestle with every one of you, since I have gone against my promises. Alas, in trying not to disappoint you with the wine, I sent Tort to tap it for you!” Akiti lamented as he was putting his spells on neck, wrists, shins and knees. Akiti’s son, Ireti, who squatted and hid himself in a small bush near there, was watching his father as he was making himself ready to wrestle with the strange fellows.

Akiti had hardly put on his spells when the champion of the fellows gave the order to one of those who had no ears to wrestle with Akiti, but Akiti knocked that one to death at once.

“‘The white ants may try, but they cannot devour the rocks,’” Akiti’s son, Ireti, whispered in proverb from his lurking place. And within a few minutes, Akiti knocked all of them to death except the champion, whose head was oval.

When the champion walked to the spot of the match, he stood firmly on the ground like a big tree and he challenged Akiti with great anger. Then both of them dashed against each other. Akiti was wrestling with him with all his power. The champion was trying all his power to raise Akiti high up and knock him down to death, but Akiti did not give him a bit of a chance. Akiti, too, was trying with all his power several times in a minute to knock him down to death, but the oval-headed champion did not give him any chance to do so.

As Akiti was dodging here and there and the champion was jumping here and there like a tiger, so Ireti was doing in his hiding place. Sometimes he craned at his father and then he hastily squatted back so that the champion might not see him. Sometimes when his father held the champion with all his power and he was trying to raise him up and knock him down to death, thus Ireti held a tree which was near him. He would shake it and try to lift it up and then knock it down. Sometimes he kicked a heavy stone which was near him. He was greatly confused at that moment, as well as his father. All his father’s attempts were arousing him to come out and help him, but he knew he must not let the champion see him.

At last, Akiti was so tired that he was unable to raise the champion up any longer. Having seen that his father would soon give up the fight, Ireti began to shake and perspire as he was moving here and there, kicking and boxing every object which was near him.

As the fight continued and became more and more fierce, Ireti saw that his father was getting weaker and weaker, but the oval-headed champion was still strong. He began to whisper to his father to kick the champion in the belly. But alas, his father could not hear him. So Ireti continued to kick the ground, stone, and trees here and there. The oval-headed champion finally raised Akiti high up and then he knocked him down to death at last.

Without hesitation, the champion ran wearily to the small bush in which Ireti lurked. He cut seven leaves from seven small trees. Though his hands nearly touched Ireti, being that he was in hurry, he did not see him.

Then the strange fellow returned to the bodies of his fellows who had been knocked to death by Akiti. He squeezed all of the leaves together in both his palms, and then he rubbed the juice which came out from the leaves on the eyes of his dead fellows. All of them recovered from death immediately except Akiti. And as soon as he threw the squeezed leaves on the ground there, he and his fellows disappeared immediately,

When Ireti noticed that they had disappeared, he came to the dead body of his father. He took the same squeezed leaves which the oval-headed champion threw on the ground. He rubbed his father’s eyes with the juice, which he forced out from them. And, to his astonishment, his father recovered from his death immediately, like those strange fellows. Then Ireti and his father went to their town at once.

Thus Ireti rescued his father, Akiti, from the strange fellows of the world beyond. As soon as Tort the Shell-man learned that Akiti had returned to his house, he fled to another part of town, where he looked for another person to betray and dupe of his money.

When Akiti failed to catch Tort and have revenge on him, he came back to his house dejected.

“My father,” Ireti appealed, “leave Tort the Shell-man for other people to have revenge on him. But as ‘a tormentor makes his victims stronger,’ I believe you will not allow anybody to betray you again like Tort the Shell-man!” Ireti remarked in proverb.





TORT AND THE DANCING MARKET-WOMEN




“Ah, our present king’s regime is bitter and unfortunate for the people of the town!” Tort the Shell-man shouted dejectedly, one morning.

“Why do you say so?” his wife, the Beetle-woman, asked.

“It is in our present king’s regime that the great famine has besieged the town,” Tort explained bitterly to his wife.

“Of course, the famine is raging bitterly now in every part of the town!” Tort’s Beetle-woman supported her husband’s view.

“But I am dying of hunger now!” Tort lamented greedily to his wife.

“Not you alone are dying of hunger, but also our children and myself. And about ninety percent of the people in the town are already in the trap of death!” The Beetle-woman despaired.

“But how can we escape from the hunger?” asked Tort bitterly.

“We cannot escape the famine when it has already spread to every part of the town!” replied the Beetle-woman.

“But what of the king too?” Tort wondered.

“You should realize that ‘What affects the eyes also affects the nose,’” the Beetle-woman explained in proverb.

“Hmm,” Tort grumbled. “But of course,” he continued in proverb, “‘Twenty children cannot play together for twenty years.’”

“But what do you mean by that?” Tort’s wife was confused.

“What I mean by that is that the famine will not continue forever,” Tort told his wife. Although Tort the Shell-man was a very handsome young man, he was the most greedy, cunning, omnivorous, slothful, and expert pilferer ever born in the town. He and his children and wife, the Beetle-woman, were most affected by the famine.

This famine, however, did not affect the next town. In this next town, there was a famous marketplace which flourished with all kinds of food-stuffs. For this, thousands of people came from various towns, cities and villages, to buy and sell goods every market-day.

One day, Tort the Shell-man sat down in front of his house, dying of hunger, while his wife and children were held up inside the house by hunger. Then with his usual cunning and abnormal bad characters, he began to plan seriously in his mind how he could go and carry foodstuffs from the market to his house without paying for them. Having thought and thought for a while, an evil thought of how he would raid the market successfully came to his mind.

As soon as the evil thought had come to Tort’s mind, he stood up. He went to the famous marketplace. Then he went from one stall to another and he noticed the kinds of the foodstuffs which were in each. But he did not attempt to steal from the food; otherwise, the Parakoyi, or the guild of traders, would arrest him and punish him with death.

However, Tort the Shell-man returned to his town of famine with full hope. He hardly got to the town when he went to one man who was a strong hole-digger.

“Good afternoon, Hole-digger!” Tort greeted him as he was perspiring profusely.

“Hallo, Tort the Shell-man! Why do I see you in my house today in the hot sun like this? Hope there is nothing bad which is chasing you about?” asked the Hole-digger with a joke and laughter.

“Hmm,” Tort grumbled and then he sat beside the Hole-digger. “‘If there is nothing wrong, a woman will not carry the dead,’” Tort replied in a proverb. “It is the hunger,” he continued, “that has driven me to your house!”

“What? Hunger?” The Hole-digger was shocked. “But I have not seen or known hunger as a living thing with feet since I was born on earth!” he gazed at Tort and shouted with wonder.

“Is that so?” Tort wondered. “But of course,” he continued, “as you are a hole-digger, you cannot experience the hunger because you are getting edible things from the holes which you dig every day!” Tort shouted humorously. “The raging famine in the town has caused the great hunger!” he added in the voice of an indigent person.

“Ho-o-o, is that so? I understand now what is chasing you about!” the Hole-digger exclaimed. “But, ‘a hungry person has no mind for any other matter,’” he joked in proverb.

“And, ‘the hunger does not realize that there is no money at home, but we feel hungry every day,’” Tort supported the Hole-digger with a proverb.

“All right, but what do you wish me to do for you, Tort, the cunning Shell-man?” the Hole-digger asked and hesitated.

“I wish you to help me dig a huge tunnel under the ground from my room down to the outskirt of the famous marketplace which is in the next town,” Tort begged in earnest.

“Well, to dig a huge tunnel in which a man can walk upright to the famous market-place is an easy thing for me to do. But, you will give me one full basket of the kola-nuts. As you know, the kola-nuts are my refreshing food when I am digging holes,” the Hole-digger demanded.

“Well, well,” Tort raised his head up and murmured. “But, ‘a roasted dog is very pleasant, but what shall we eat before it is roasted?’” Tort murmured to the Hole-digger in proverb.

“But,” replied the Hole-digger in proverb, “‘One who does not give should not expect to receive.’”

“Well, if it is so, I shall go to some farms where I may get some kola-nuts for you.” Tort went away doubtfully.

But Tort could not get the kola-nuts, especially in this time of great famine. Instead, he filled up one bag with gravel and then he brought the heavy bag to the Hole-digger as kola-nuts. The Hole-digger hastily took the heavy bag from Tort and he was so happy and pleased that he did not attempt to loosen the bag and see what was inside it, but he simply hid it in his room.

Then in the night, he dug a very huge tunnel under the ground from one of Tort’s rooms down to the outskirt of the famous marketplace. The following morning, Tort entered the tunnel. He walked inside it to the outskirt of the famous marketplace. Then he hid himself near the entrance of it. There he was waiting for daybreak, when the market-women would arrive at the market with their foodstuffs.

As soon as it was daybreak, multitudes of women and men traders arrived at the market. When it was about eight o’clock, and the noises of the people were filling up the air, Tort the Shell-man came out cautiously from his hiding place. He started to sing a kind of enchanting song unexpectedly.

The song was very enchanting when the multitude of people heard it. They did not know when they left their foodstuffs and other wares, but they jumped up and started to dance madly about in the market. As Tort continued to sing the song, the people were not aware as they danced far away from the marketplace.

Then, without hesitation, Tort walked to their stalls. He carried nearly all their foodstuffs into his huge tunnel. Having done so as quickly as possible, he blocked the entrance of the hole with a flat stone. Then, through the tunnel, he carried it all to his room. So he, his wife and children ate from the food to their entire satisfaction.

As soon as the magic song died down and the market-women were conscious, they returned wearily to their stalls. They were confused and panicked when they saw that almost all of their wares had disappeared. Then they went back to their respective towns, cities, and villages with empty hands.

It was so Tort the Shell-man scared the people away from the marketplace with his enchanting magic song and carried away their wares for a number of market-days. The market-women and other people thought that it was an evil immortal being who came to the market and carried their wares away each market-day.

Having seen that thousands of the women traders had deserted the marketplace, “Parakoyi” or the guild of traders reported what was happening in the market to the king of this town.

The following market-day, the king and his regents went to the marketplace in order to see what was happening there for themselves. But, as soon as Tort peeped from his huge tunnel and saw that people had already filled up in the market and that they had displayed their wares in the stalls, he started to sing his usual enchanting song. And as soon as people had danced far away, along with the king and his regents, Tort walked to the stalls and started to carry their foodstuffs into his tunnel. As he continued to carry the food from one stall to another, he saw the king’s crown and tassel on the ground, and he carried both together with the food into his tunnel. And through the tunnel, he carried it all to his room.

The king was not aware when his crown fell from his head onto the ground and his cow-tail tassel fell down also from his hand, because he, and his regents, and the other people enjoyed the magic song so much that they were unconscious immediately.

Soon after Tort had stopped singing his magic song, the king, his regents and the other people became conscious. But, when they returned to the market, they were extremely surprised and afraid when they saw that almost all of the foodstuffs had been carried away.

The king and his regents returned to the palace with grief and fear, and the women and traders returned to their respective towns, cities, and villages with empty hands.

“Kabiyesi [Your Worship], where is your crown?” one of the chiefs asked with amazement.

“My crown? My crown! But where is my crown?” The king scrambled his forehead with both his hands and shouted terribly.

“And where is your tassel?” one of the councilors asked.

“Oh, yes, my tassel as well! But where is it?” The king was greatly confused.

“Perhaps all had fallen off from you when Your Worship was dancing in the marketplace!” another one of the regents reminded the king.

When it was the next market-day, the king sent the Four-footed Osanyin (the god of healing who is vast in knowledge of magic spells of all kinds) to the marketplace. He ordered him to catch and bring to him whomsoever deprived those market-women of their wares each market-day, and also to find and bring his crown and tassel to him.

Though the Four-footed Osanyin went fearlessly to the market, he could not wait and catch the culprit once he had heard Tort’s enchanting song. Instead, he danced and danced madly along the way to the palace. But, to everyone’s horror, three of his four feet had fallen off on the way, and so he hardly reached the palace with the remaining one.

“Have you seen or caught the evil culprit who is raiding the market?” the king asked impatiently.

“Oh, Kabiyesi, ‘an elephant’s head is not a load for a child,’” the Four-footed Osanyin explained in a proverb with great fear. “Though I have a lot of magic spells and wands, I could not wait and catch one who is stealing the women’s wares. But once I had heard his song, I started to dance and dance madly until I came back to you! Kabiyesi, this is not a simple matter at all! Even three of my four feet had fallen off my body and all of my spells and wands had fallen away from me as well on the way!” the Four-footed Osanyin explained to the king, trembling in fear.

“So you have failed to catch him?” the king wondered.

“Kabiyesi, I’ll repeat it to you. ‘An elephant’s head is not a load for a child,’” the Four-footed Osanyin emphasized in proverb. “But Kabiyesi,” he continued, “don’t take it as an insult that I stand before you and am speaking to you in proverb—a messenger like me should not speak to you in that way!” The Four-footed Osanyin bowed with respect and apologized.

“Yes, I forgive you,” the king pardoned him for speaking to him in proverb.

“But what did the market raider look like?” one chief asked confusedly.

“I could not describe him at all because I am not bold enough to wait and see him well!” the Four-footed Osanyin explained.

“But have you seen my crown and my tassel, the cow-tail?” the king asked.

“I could not wait and search for them in the market,” he replied.

“Oh, well, well,” the king beat his head and said with a tired voice. “But you, the Four-footed Osanyin, who we the people of the town supposed to be the most powerful and vast in magic spells and wands, have failed to catch the invisible culprit!”

Fortunately, when the king was just lowering his head down in confusion, the One-footed Osanyinleapt in to the palace. Having prostrated in front of the king and his chiefs and counselors, he said, “Kabiyesi, I have just heard of the invisible creature who is raiding the market I have come to promise you that I am well vast in magic spells and bold enough to catch the invisible creature!”

“You, but One-footed Osanyin,are promising me that you can catch the invisible market raider?” the king, chiefs, and the counselors derided the One-footed Osanyin.

“Certainly, it is a thing which I can do easily, though I am a One-footed Osanyin!”

“But the Four-footed Osanyin, who is more knowledgeable in magic spells and wands than you, had failed woefully to catch the culprit. How much more can you do with only one foot?” the king doubted.

“Kabiyesi, just send me to the marketplace and see what I shall do!” One-footed Osanyin insisted on going.

“All right, tomorrow is another market-day. I order you, go there and catch the invisible thief and bring him before me,” the king ordered doubtfully.

The following morning, which was a market-day, One-footed Osanyin took his magic spells, his blacksmith bellows, one thick, sharp, pointed iron rod, and a little quantity of coals and fire. Then he went to the marketplace. Having got there, he hid himself in one corner and made fire with the coals. He put the iron rod in the fire and then he started to blow the fire continuously with the bellows.

As soon as the market was full of people, as usual as“A lobster-eater cannot stop at eating only one,” Tort came to the market through his huge tunnel to carry the women’s foodstuffs away again.

But when he started to sing his usual enchanting song, and the women and other people in the market heard it and then danced madly away, and so he came out from his hole to the market. As the Shell-man was going from one stall to another, he was collecting the foodstuffs together. But, One-footed Osanyin could not dance along with the women, for he had only one foot. Tort’s magic song had no effect on him. So, he saw Tort in the stalls and then he hastily took his pointed red-hot iron rod from the fire. He leapt fast to Tort. Then he pushed him down suddenly and without hesitation he pierced the red-hot iron into the unhappy Shell-man’s neck.

Tort began to lament loudly for pain. “Ah, One-footed Osanyin, pardon me! Pardon me! I will become your slave as from today and onward! Please, One-footed Osanyin pardon me! I will become your slave today!” But the One-footed Osanyin did not listen to him, and he carried him to the king instead.

“What? So it is you, Tort the Shell-man, who has been stealing away the market-women’s wares all these days?” The king, chiefs and counselors were greatly surprised. “Well, Tort, let you be the sacrifice for Osanyin today and forever!” the king shouted and cursed him angrily.

It was so the king’s curse had come upon Tort the Shell-man, and thus he was ruined by his cunning, greed, and selfishness. Then the king praised the One-footed Osanyin greatly and he gave him a valuable present in reward of his bravery.





TORT’S BITTER MARRIAGE




Pauper and Brawler were born and lived in a big city, well crowded with people. At last, Pauper became Tort’s real first name, for he kept too long in a very miserable condition. From his youth he was so poor that he went from one dustbin to another and he collected the crumbs of rotten food that which he ate; otherwise he would have died of hunger in his youth. It was this he did for a number of years. His nickname was Shell-man while his surname was Tort, which he inherited from his father. Being that Shell-man’s father was a great niggard in his time, the name “Tort” was given to his father in respect of his niggardliness.

Pauper Tort was so lazy that he hardly maintained his very small farm, which was a little distance from the city. Although the farm did not yield good crops, Pauper got welfare aid from some people of importance in the city, since he was also a great sweet-talker. Pauper was also a great agitator whose agitation was so strong that it roused hundreds of people who opposed the king of the city. But people hated him later, for he talked and agitated to the point that enemies besieged the city several times.

Afterwards, Brawler became the first name of Yanribo, while Yanribo was her surname and her nickname was Beetle-lady. The name “Brawler” was given to her in respect of her abnormal attitudes. She was a great brawler, the most obstinate and self-willed Beetle-lady who ever lived in the land during that century.

Then Tort the Shell-man, who was afterwards called “Pauper,” was a handsome young man, though he was very miserable. Later, he married Yanribo, who was the great Brawler, and as a married woman her nickname was changed from Beetle-lady to Beetle-woman.

But of course, Pauper Tort the Shell-man was as beautiful as a zebra or peacock and his wife, the great Brawler, was also as beautiful as a peacock. He was poor, and also his abnormal characters were the talk of the city and throughout the neighbouring countries, cities and villages.

Pauper and his wife, Brawler the Beetle-woman, had only two children. They could have had more than those two, but the poverty of Pauper and the hot brawls of his wife hindered them from having more than that.

Although Pauper and Brawler already had two children, Pauper’s nephew, who was called Alaafia, otherwise known as Peace, and Brawler’s niece, who was called Ayo, or Joy, lived with them for many years. But, as time went on, Brawler’s hot brawls tortured Peace and Joy so much that at last, when they could no longer tolerate the harmful effects of the brawls, they fled to one of the houses which were on the outskirts of the city, and there both of them lived peacefully and joyfully.

Yet, as for Brawler, the Beetle-woman, her everyday work began at daybreak, when she started to brawl hotly, and she would chase her husband about inside the house and around the premises to the front of the house. Thus she did round their property until midnight, or when she fell asleep suddenly in the night.

And further, to complete the testimony about Brawler, she also brawled horribly in her sleep and dreams. For all her abnormal behaviours, she had no time at all to do any work that could fetch her money. Worse still, all the other women in the city hated her extremely because of her horrible and continuous brawls.

But then the other people of the city remarked that only Pauper himself could live with Brawler, his wife, and that only Brawler herself could live with Pauper, her husband., because their abnormal characters were absolutely the same.

The people even further remarked in proverb that “Bottle and Demijohn are made from the same material – glass – yet both hate each other and scorn each other.” It was just the same for Pauper and his wife, the great Brawler. Pauper was the greatest talker and agitator who ever lived in the city, and it was so for his wife, who was the greatest Brawler who ever lived in the city! Thus the people assessed them.

Pauper Tort the Shell-man planted one cherry tree in front of the little house in which he, his wife, and his children lived. Pauper’s tree bore hundreds of cherries in a year and the cherries were of the best quality in the city. Though Pauper Tort was a lazy farmer, he used to go and work on his little farm occasionally. He would return to the house sometime in the evening with one very small yam, because each of his yams was small as an egg.

But the worst of it was that each time the yam was put in the fire to roast, Brawler’s continuous hot brawls and quarrels with her husband would not allow her to pay heed to the yam, and so it would burn into ashes. Then she, her husband and their two children would not eat that night. It was so that all of the family lived in great misery and quarrels.

But as time went on, their Creator saw their restless living. He was so sorry for them that one morning, He sent one of His messengers to them to ask them the kind of help that each of them wished Him to do for him or her.

Without hesitation, the messenger left for the city of Pauper and his wife. When he zigzagged to their door, he stopped and knocked at the door first. “Good morning to you all here!” the messenger greeted aloud.

“Good morning to you! Please come in!” Pauper replied with the voice of that of a pauper, as his wife was brawling hotly all about in the house.

“Yes, there is a very good message from the Creator for you and your wife, please!” The messenger entered and shouted cheerfully and politely as he stood in front of Pauper.

“A message from the Creator?” Pauper was shocked and moved back a bit.

“Certainly! A good message indeed!” the messenger confirmed.

“But who are you?” Pauper asked confusedly as his wife continued to brawl so hotly that her brawls did not allow her to pay heed to what her husband and the messenger were talking about.

“I am one of the Creator’s messengers!” the messenger introduced himself.

“Oh! Is that so? I see! But what is the message all about?” Pauper asked reluctantly with a pauper’s voice.

“Please ask your wife to come to us because the message concerns her as well!” the messenger said and hesitated.

“My Beetle-woman, the great Brawler, please come and listen to the Creator’s message!” Pauper shouted poorly on his wife.

“Yes, here I am! But what is the message?” Brawler continued brawling in front of the messenger and her husband.

“By the way, what are you brawling hotly like this for, young Beetle-woman?” The messenger was astonished, and then he folded his arms and hesitated.

“You see, my husband is a nuisance entirely. He is too cunning! He is a pilferer and a great pauper of our time!” Brawler brawled hotly with an absent mind.

“Is that all you are brawling for?” the messenger wondered.

“No! Not at all! He is my husband, who I know as well as I know my money. He is a villain, an expert liar, a deceiver, and all sorts of things that I cannot remember now! And . . . and . . . and for all his abnormal had characters, the other people of the city hate him!” the Brawler sighed and then she started brawling on another matter entirely.

“Hmmm! That means you and your husband have the same abnormal bad characters, for you are accusing him of abnormal bad characters and so he is accusing you too. So I take the two of you to be the bottle and the demijohn which are accusing each other. The bottle accuses the demijohn that it is made of glass, and the demijohn also accuses bottle that it is made of glass! But what is the difference between glass and glass?” the messenger explained in proverb to the Brawler.

“Yes, I admit that both ‘bottle’ and ‘demijohn’ are family!” the Brawler brawled.

“Good for you! So since your husband is a great talker and agitator, cunning and a villain, and you as well are a great brawler who grumbles about everything which is on earth, therefore both of you are family,” the messenger appeased the Brawler.

“All right, what do you wish the Creator to do for your husband, the Pauper?” the messenger asked calmly from the Brawler.

“Good! I wish the Creator to help me slay him!” the Brawler bellowed mercilessly, and then she was sullen. She was squinting at the messenger and her husband, Pauper.

“Is that your wish?” the messenger asked coolly.

“Exactly!” she confirmed hastily as her husband looked on speechless.

“Yes, Pauper, what do you wish the Creator to do for your wife, the great Brawler?” the messenger fastened his eyes on Pauper and asked politely.

“I am the greatest Pauper of this century and my wife’s brawls are the most peevish, and the only treasure which I have on earth is the cherry tree which is in front of the house. I do not wish my Creator to slay or harm anyone on earth. All I want to wish is that the Creator would give my voice a very effective command. So if a person crouches by my cherry tree, and if I command that he be stuck on to the tree, he will stick on to it immediately. Please, kind messenger, help me tell the Creator that, that only this power of command is what I wish Him to give my voice,” Pauper requested carefully as his wife continued to brawl hotly about in the house.

“Well, your own wish and your wife’s wish will be approved by the Creator as soon as I return to Him and deliver all to Him!” the messenger assured Pauper and his wife.

Then he walked zigzag outside and soon after he disappeared suddenly in a strong whirlwind which descended from the sky to the ground at that moment.

Then the messenger told the Creator the kind of help that Pauper and his wife, Brawler, wanted from Him as soon as he returned to Him. And the Creator commanded, “Let their wish be as they wish!”

And in fact, immediately the Creator approved Pauper’s wish and his wife’s wish. There was a strong effective command in his voice, so effective that everything he commanded with his voice came to pass immediately. As for his wife’s wish, the Creator agreed to send Death down to slay him for her.

One morning, Pauper was agitating bitterly about his wife’s behaviours, and his wife too was brawling hotly, and both of them were chasing each other fiercely about in the house for some time around the premises to the front of their house. Death suddenly appeared in their house.

Without hesitation, Death shouted horribly on them, “Eh! You stop there! This morning, Pauper, for your wife’s wish, I come to take your life away to the Creator!”

“Thank you, Death. I agree to be slayed for my wife, and I am ready to join my ancestors today! But I wish you to do me a favor first before you slay me!” Pauper said fearlessly.

“What kind of favor do you wish me to do for you?” Death shouted impatiently as Brawler, his wife, was then tiptoeing around them, despising her husband.

“Thank you Death!” Pauper said and pointed to his cherry tree. “Do you see that cherry-tree?”

“Yes, I see it in front of your house!” Death confirmed. “But make haste to surrender your life,” Death shouted horribly as he fastened his eyes on the tree.

“Good. That cherry tree is the only treasure I have on earth. So I wish you to allow me pluck just one cherry from the tree and eat it first before you slay me for my wife!” Pauper begged Death as his wife chuckled.

“Oh, well. Your request is quite simple. But go now and pluck the fruit and eat it at once!” Death shouted.

Then Pauper took one stool nearby and walked to his tree. He put the stool down at the foot of the tree and he climbed the stool. He pretended to outstretch himself so that his hand could reach one or two of the fruit. But, when his hand could not reach the fruit, he begged Death, whose arms were longer, to help him pluck it.

Fortunately, the strong effective command of his voice induced Death so much that he could not refuse, and so Death climbed the stool. Pauper stood a few meters away from his cherry tree, and as soon as Death outstretched his right hand to pluck the cherry, Pauper commanded aloud:

“Death, let the whole of you stick on to my cherry-tree!”

To Death’s and Brawler’s fear, Pauper had hardly commanded this when the body of Death stuck on to the tree like a bird stuck on to a very strong birdlime.

Now Death was powerless, and he started to beg Pauper to command his cherry tree to release him.

“No! Not until you swear that as from today and forever, you will not kill neither a pauper nor a brawler!” Pauper shouted mercilessly.

“Well, to abide by your request, I, Death, therefore swear that henceforth and forever, I shall not kill neither a pauper nor a brawler!” Death promised with fretfulness. “And if I attempt to do so,” he continued, “let the day change to night and let the darkness of the night swallow me up.”

Then Pauper commanded his cherry-tree to release Death, and he was released at once. Death feared Pauper so much this time that he disappeared suddenly without even thanking him.

When Pauper’s wife saw that Death had failed to slay her husband for her, she collapsed and fainted for a few minutes. Her husband, however, treated her until she was conscious. She had hardly become conscious when she stood up and then resumed her usual brawl. Because she was brawling hotly at her husband, Tort was agitating so deeply about his wife’s brawls that some hours later his wife started to bite him. When he felt the severe pain, he ran outside of the house for his life, but she followed him and continued to bite him. He started to run desperately to the outskirts of the city, and his wife was chasing him along the way to bite him again as she continued to brawl loudly. After a while, she chased him to the house in which Peace and Joy lived near the outskirt of the city.

Peace was the nephew of Pauper and Joy was the niece of Brawler. Both of them lived with Pauper and Brawler before for many years, but they left them with sadness because they could not live with a brawler or a quarrelsome or austere person.

But when Brawler chased her husband, Pauper, fiercely to where Peace and Joy lived, she shouted for help, “Please, Peace, help me bite my husband! Do this, I beg you!”

“No! I am Peace and I do only peaceful things!” Peace declined to help.

“Please, Joy, help me bite my husband!” Brawler waved her hands to Joy and begged impatiently.

“No! I do only joyful things!” Joy also protested.

Thus both Peace and Joy refused to help Brawler and instead hastily entered the house in which they lived with only peaceful and joyful people.

After a few minutes, Brawler chased her husband fiercely to the extreme end of the outskirts of the city, where there was a big river. Without hesitation, Pauper jumped fearlessly into that river. Brawler, having brawled a bit already, jumped fearlessly into that river as well. But as both of them were beating each other on the surface of the water, they drowned suddenly.

They continued to beat each other at the bottom of the river until they went unconscious. Within a few seconds, they found themselves standing awake together with Peace and Joy in front of a beautiful, strange, mighty building. The strange, mighty building had no doors or windows or even an exit, but there was a very strange, huge voice which was coming out of it. The voice was as strong as an echo.

At once this strong voice roared:

“Who are you standing there?”

“I am Pauper, whose surname is Tort and whose nickname is Shell-man, and I am the husband of the great Brawler!” Pauper thus introduced himself to the invisible enquirer.

“Thank you, Pauper Tort the Shell-man! But who is that woman standing there?” the invisible enquirer roared.

“I am Brawler, whose surname is Yanribo, and my nickname is Beetle-woman!” Pauper’s wife, Brawler, replied while trembling.

“The third person?” roared the invisible enquirer.

“My name is Peace!” Peace replied peacefully.

“Yes, the fourth person?” boomed the invisible enquirer.

“My name is Joy!” Joy replied joyfully.

“Yes, I know the name of every one of you now!” said the invisible enquirer. “Now as from today and forever,” continued the enquirer, “the four of you will exist everywhere on earth!” the enquirer roared. “But Joy and Peace will not be in a family in which there is a brawl or quarrel. And so, both of you will not live with a lazy person, or an idler, or he who shirks work, nor he who has no perseverance!

“And I command again that as from henceforth and forever, Pauper and the Brawler will never have peace and joy in their fold, but where Pauper, or poverty, is present, Brawler will be there with him. And where there is Brawler, Pauper will be there with her. And so, Pauper and Brawler will be chasing each other fiercely about forever. Now, I command the four of you to turn into four different kinds of spirits and roam about on earth. And let Pauper and Brawler go into the minds of those who are weak in their minds or who cannot control their minds or who have no strong determinations, to live in them and be influencing. them. But, let Peace and Joy go into the minds of those who are cheerful, thoughtful, passive, meek, patient and hard-working people! Goodbye!”

It was thus the invisible enquirer, who was the Creator who sent his messenger and Death to Pauper and his wife, commanded the four of them and they turned to four different kinds of spirits which could not be felt if they were touched. And the huge voice, the invisible enquirer, hardly stopped speaking when the four spirits flew all over the world.

So to this day, these four spirits still exist, and so brawls, quarrels, bloodshed, peevishness, etc., are the enemies of peace and joy.





A Few Words as Afterword to Amos Tutuola

by Matthew Cheney




Amos Tutuola was the first internationally famous black African writer of the modern age, but he was also, in the words of Oyekan Owomoyela, “undoubtedly one of the most controversial of African writers”.1 His reputation has fluctuated tremendously since the publication of his first book, The Palm-Wine Drinkard, in 1952 in England, where it received a laudatory review from the poet Dylan Thomas that helped bring extraordinary attention to it. Tutuola’s next book, My Life in the Bush of Ghosts, would go on to similar international fame, but his later books never matched the success of the first two, and he would die in 1997 without the awards, acclaim, influence, and wealth of the writers for whom he paved the way: Chinua Achebe, Wole Soyinka, Ben Okri, and so many others.

The primary controversies about Tutuola have been over his originality and his style of English. He has been accused of plagiarism and of being popular only because he fits a stereotype of a “primitive”, uneducated African simpleton. His detractors are passionate, their denunciations vitriolic because in their eyes Tutuola plays to stereotypes so as to gain approval from non-African readers who are ignorant of the rich and complex cultures of the continent.

The question of originality is easiest to dispense with. Tutuola admitted his influences, and they are clear: Yoruba oral tradition, the Yoruba writings of D.O. Fagunwa, and, to a somewhat lesser extent, John Bunyan’s Pilgrim’s Progress. Later, as Tutuola received books from England, other influences would appear and his work would gain a slightly more conventional form. No writer is without influences or even direct borrowings, and like all great writers, what Tutuola’s best work achieves is an amalgamation of these influences. It is a rare Tutuola story that is simply a retelling of a Yoruba folktale, for instance—instead, his stories mix elements from folktales with material from other sources, including Tutuola’s own imagination, to create stories that are both resonant and unique.

Tutuola’s use of English has been challenging readers from the beginning. His first language was Yoruba, and with only a few years of schooling, he did not have the opportunity for consistent training in written English. His works were edited for clarity from the beginning, although the history of that editing could almost make for a book itself. Tutuola sometimes expressed a desire to write more “proper” English, in adulthood he attended classes when he could to improve his knowledge, and his last few manuscripts were polished by the American professor Robert Wren, who was, according to Bernth Lindfors, “responsible for purifying and refining the author’s language”.2 Reading Tutuola’s work in the order of its publication, we see in the first few books a unique mode of expression that was compared to Joyce and Faulkner, then his books in the 1960s that seemed to have little if any editing (while at the same time Tutuola’s method was moving deliberately closer to standard fictional practices as he read and learned more), and then finally the last books, Yoruba Folktales (1986) and The Village Witch Doctor and Other Stories (1990), where the English is mostly standard and the story forms are richer with “normal” fictional techniques such as detailed description and dramatized dialogue.

Tutuola’s prose, then, has always been subject to some editing, and that is true of this volume as well. Compare, for instance, the version of “The Town of Famine (The Feather Woman of the Jungle)” published here with the version published in 1962 in the book Feather Woman of the Jungle. Here is a passage from the 1962 version:

Having heard like that as well from him, then without hesitation, I started to drink the cold water. But when it was not yet daybreak when I was woken by hunger in the following morning. I hardly got up when I went to the king’s attendants, I complained to them again that since I had come to the town I had nothing to eat except cold water which I was drinking. I complained to them perhaps they might help me. But I was very surprised that they did not allow me to tell them all of my complaints when they interrupted immediately they heard the word “hunger” from me. They naked themselves and told me to look how every one of them was leaned. They told me further that I, too, would soon become bones if I kept longer in that town.3

Here is that same paragraph as it has been rendered by the editor of this edition:

Then, having now heard the same from him, without hesitation I started to drink the cold water. It was not yet daybreak when I was woken by hunger in the following morning. I had hardly got up when I went to the king’s attendants. I complained to them again that since I had come to the town I had nothing to eat except cold water, which I was drinking. I complained to them perhaps they might help me, but I was very surprised that they did not allow me to tell them all of my complaints, for they interrupted immediately after they heard the word “hunger” from me. They stripped themselves naked and told me to look how every one of them had become lean. They told me further that I, too, would soon become bones if I kept longer in that town.

Even a sensitive, thoughtful edit such as this raises complex questions of authenticity. What voice is the “true” voice of Tutuola? He was not an artist who knew the rules and set out to break them so much as he was a writer whose style achieved unique expressions through his ignorance of some of the rules of standard written English and, perhaps even more importantly, his tendency to make English fit the patterns of the Yoruba language that he was most comfortable with. At times in his life, if not always, he claimed to aspire to the unadorned, matter-of-fact, standardized prose of Achebe, and he apparently welcomed the editing of his sentences into standardized forms. How much of this came from embarrassment, or in reaction to critics who found his prose “childish” and “ungrammatical”, is difficult to know. The challenge for editors is to decide what is a “mistake” and what is an essential element of Tutuola’s style. No two editors would burnish his prose in exactly the same way. This is not, though, a challenge unique to editors of Tutuola’s works.

Perhaps one day we will be able to afford Tutuola the sorts of academic critical editions afforded to major American and European writers—collections that include facsimiles of manuscripts alongside edited versions. Or perhaps we could have multiple editions as we have editions of Shakespeare in the original spelling and punctuation to complement the more common modernized editions (Hamlet, after all, in the First Folio spoke of “The vndiscouered Countrey, from whose Borne/ No Traueller returnes…”). A thousand dissertations have been written on variations in editions of Joyce’s books, and Faulkner’s novels, too, have been edited and unedited, so the early comparisons of Tutuola to those two Modernist masters were even more accurate than was known at the time. For many great writers, there is no definitive text.

What survives the editing is imagination, vision, attitude. Plenty of writers have first been acclaimed in terrible translations, and so we know that greatness is not only a matter of style, but also of structure, image, and intangible qualities of form and content: the magic of genius.

The foundation of Tutuola’s uniqueness is the utter unpredictability of his tales. Reading them, we have a sense that word by word and sentence-by-sentence, anything could happen. It is a mistake to refer to Tutuola’s writings as “magical realism”, because they are stories that defy any neat borders between fantasy and reality, dream and waking, legend and history, past and present. They are no less or more magical than they are realistic; they are stories that deny a distinction between the two categories. They often seem to exist outside of time—indeed, another criticism of Tutuola has been that he never engaged with the political realities of his world in the way that most African writers have. (Such a reductive and narrow view of how literature works would likely say the same of Kafka.) With some of the stories, a first reading is tremendously disorienting, because we are trained as readers to let stories fill us with expectations based on causalities that we either understand from our own world or that have been delineated within the reality of the story itself. That’s what creates suspense and allows us an idea of coherent characters and events. With Tutuola’s stories, it can be difficult to get your bearings on a first reading. This effect is enhanced by Tutuola’s nonstandard English. It is a language ideally suited to the stories, wreaking havoc with our grammatical expectations in the same way the tales’ events wreak havoc with our narrative expectations. Reading Tutuola, we learn to read anew.

In 1977, when Tutuola’s reputation was at a low point in the world and, especially, in Nigeria, Chinua Achebe gave an important speech at the University of Ibadan: “Work and Play in Tutuola’s Palm-Wine Drinkard”. Before developing ideas about Tutuola’s moral vision and thematic structures, Achebe said:

A young Nigerian woman doing a higher degree in America said to me when I taught there in the 1970s, “I hear you teach Tutuola.” It was not a simple statement; her accent was heavy with accusation. We discussed the matter for a while and it became quite clear that she considered The Palm-Wine Drinkard to be childish and crude and certainly not the kind of thing a patriotic Nigerian should be exporting to America. Back in Nigeria a few years later I also noticed a certain condescension among my students toward the book and a clear indication that they did not consider it good enough to engage the serious attention of educated adults like themselves. They could not see what it was about.4

We are still learning to see what Tutuola was about. Despite accusations and criticism, despite neglect and abuse, Tutuola’s work has survived for over fifty years so far, finding readers here and there who are enchanted by the wonders of his tales, and who are mesmerized by the strange, surprising turns they take. He is not part of the tradition of African writers who engage the world through stark realism. Instead, his is a different approach, a more phantasmagorical one, more improvisatory and, for all its appeals to the past, a deeply personal one that puts him in a small and special group with such writers as Dambudzo Marechera, Yvonne Vera, and his most obvious heir, Ben Okri. Writers so unique that they cannot be followed or copied, because to do so is to make your imitation obvious. The territory such writers stake out is theirs alone. In that sense, Tutuola is a writer whose work cannot be absorbed into a line or genre, for it is its own antecedent and descendant, gloriously unassimilable.

We are still learning to see what he was about, yes, and we are still learning to read him.





Further Reading




Chinua Achebe, “Work and Play in Tutuola’s Palm-Wine Drinkard”. Hopes and Impediments: Selected Essays. New York: Doubleday, 1988.

Robert Elliot Fox, “Tutuola and the Commitment to Tradition”. Research in African Literatures, vol. 29, no. 3 (Autumn, 1998), pp. 203-208.

Carolyn Hart, “In Search of African Literary Aesthetics: Production and Reception of the Texts of Amos Tutuola and Yvonne Vera”. Journal of African Cultural Studies, vol. 21, no. 2 (December 2009), pp. 177–195.

Bernth Lindfors, Early West African Writers: Amos Tutuola, Cyprian Ekwensi, and Ayi Kwei Armah. Trenton, NJ: Africa World Press, 2010.

Gail Low, “The Natural Artist: Publishing Amos Tutuola’s ‘The Palm-Wine Drinkard’ in Postwar Britain”. Research in African Literatures, vol. 37, no. 4 (Dec. 1, 2006), pp. 15-33.

Sarah Nuttall, “Reading, Recognition and the Postcolonial”. Interventions: International Journal of Postcolonial Studies, vol. 3, issue 3 (2001), pp. 391-404.

Steven M. Tobias, “Amos Tutuola and the Colonial Carnival”. Research in African Literatures, vol. 30, no. 2 (Summer, 1999), pp. 66-74.





About the Author




Amos Tutuola (1920–1997) was a largely self-taught Nigerian writer who became internationally praised for books based in part on Yoruba folktales, especially the phantasmagorical classic The Palm-Wine Drinkard (1952). Welsh poet Dylan Thomas called the novel “thronged, grisly and bewitching,” bringing it even more attention. He is considered an iconic international writer.


Works by Amos Tutuola

The Palm-wine Drinkard and His Dead Palm-wine Tapster in the Dead’s Town. London: Faber & Faber, 1954; New York: Grove Press, 1953.

My Life in the Bush of Ghosts. London: Faber & Faber, 1954; New York: Grove Press, 1954.

Simbi and the Satyr of the Dark Jungle. London: Faber & Faber, 1955; San Francisco: City Lights, 1988.

The Brave African Huntress, illustrated by Ben Enwonwu. London: Faber & Faber, 1958; New York: Grove Press, 1958.

Feather Woman of the Jungle. London: Faber & Faber, 1962; San Francisco: City Lights, 1988.

Ajaiyi and His Inherited Poverty. London: Faber & Faber, 1967.

Winds of Change: Modern Short Stories from Black Africa, Longman, 1977 (contributor).

The Witch-Herbalist of the Remote Town. London & Boston: Faber & Faber, 1981.

The Wild Hunter in the Bush of the Ghosts. Washington, DC: Three Continents Press, 1982; revised edition, 1989. A facsimile of the manuscript, edited with an introduction and postscript by Bernth Lindfors.

Yoruba Folktales, compiled and translated by Tutuola, illustrated by Kola Adesokan. Ibadan, Nigeria: Ibadan University Press, 1986.

Pauper, Brawler, and Slanderer. London & Boston: Faber & Faber, 1982.

The Village Witch Doctor, and Other Stories. London & Boston: Faber & Faber, 1990.


Honours and Awards

Mbari Club - Co-founder.

Visiting Research Fellow, University of Ife, (now Obafemi Awolowo University) Nigeria, 1979.

Honorary Citizen of New Orleans (USA), 1983.

Honorary Fellow of International Writing Program, University of Iowa, (USA), 1983.

Winner of Grimzane and Cavour Award, Italy, 1989.

Honorary Fellow of the Modern Language Association of America, (the third African ever to be granted).

Noble Patron of the Arts, Pan-African Writers Association, Ghana.

Meridian Award, Odu Themes, Nigeria,1995.

Special Fellowship Award, National League of Veteran Journalists, Nigeria, 1996.





Footnotes



1 Amos Tutuola Revisited. New York: Twayne Publishers, 1999. Page 1.

2 Early West African Writers: Amos Tutuola, Cyprian Ekwensi, and Ayi Kwei Armah. Trenton, NJ: Africa World Press, 2010. Page 106.

3 Feather Woman of the Jungle. London: Faber and Faber, 1962. Page 70.

4 Hopes and Impediments: Selected Essays. New York: Doubleday, 1988. Page 100.





