The Village Witch Doctor and Other Stories


AMOS TUTUOLA





Table of Contents





Title Page

		The Village Witch Doctor

		A Short Biography of Tortoise

		A Short Biography of Yanribo, Tortoise’s Wife

		Ajao and the Active Bone

		Don’t Pay Bad for Bad

		Akanke and the Jealous Pawnbroker

		Remember the Day After Tomorrow

		Ade, the Traitor

		Rere, the Disobedient Son

		The Duckling Brothers and their Disobedient Sister

		The Rich Husbandman and his Odd-looking Pawn

		The Greedy Tortoise and the Orisa-Oko

		About the Author

		By the Same Author

		Copyright





The Village Witch Doctor




Some centuries ago there lived in a village two middle-aged men named Aro and his friend Osanyin. Aro was from a rich family while Osanyin was the witch doctor of the village. Osanyin was well known throughout the village and also all other surrounding villages because of his profession.

Aro inherited a large sum of money, farms, and other valuable property when his father died.

One night, Aro invited Osanyin to come to visit him. Aro begged his friend to help him carry his inherited money to a faraway bush. The village witch doctor asked in surprise, ‘What are you going to do with the money in the bush?’

‘I wish to bury it there,’ Aro explained, pointing to two large water pots in which he had placed the money. ‘I am afraid that if I leave it in the house, thieves may break in and steal it away.’

‘Oh, yes,’ Osanyin replied cheerfully, ‘I see your point. Let us carry the money to the bush and bury it there before daybreak!’ Then both friends stood up and each of them put one of the water pots on to his head, and each carried a long machete. Then they started on their journey in the darkness to the bush.

Then, as soon as they got to the bush, they dug two deep pits at the foot of an Iroko tree. They buried the water pots in the pits, and after that they returned to the village before daybreak. Now Aro had rest of mind because his inherited wealth was safe.

But while Aro was happy that his money was safe from thieves, Osanyin the witch doctor was thinking that he could steal it from the bush. One midnight, therefore, the witch doctor went to the bush. He dug out the two water pots of money. He carried both to his house before daybreak, and he buried them in front of his gods which were in the shrine.

One day, when Aro needed money badly, not knowing that his friend had stolen the money, he went to the bush intending to take some of it. To his disappointment, when he dug the pits, he found nothing in them. He held his head in both hands and burst into tears, and then he went directly to the witch doctor’s house. He said, as he continued to weep loudly and bitterly, ‘My money, which we buried in the bush a few months ago, has been stolen away!’

The witch doctor pretended to be surprised and innocent by saying, ‘Has your money been stolen, or is it you cannot remember what you wanted to tell me?’

‘I say my money!’ Aro confirmed, ‘which we buried at the foot of the Iroko tree!’

‘Well, if that is so, go back to your house and have a rest. When it is night, I shall find out from my gods who has stolen the money. Then I shall come and tell you the name of whoever has stolen it. At that time we shall decide how to arrest him and take him to the elders of the village.’ The witch doctor caressed Aro as he deceived him.

When it was midnight, Osanyin the witch doctor, without asking anything from his gods, went to Aro’s house. He had hardly sat down when Aro asked impatiently, ‘Osanyin, what is the name of the person whom your gods told you has stolen my money?’

‘I am very surprised,’ the witch doctor said deceitfully. ‘My gods disclosed to me distinctly that it was your dead father who has stolen your money from the pits, and not a living person at all!’

‘What?’ said Aro, greatly shocked. ‘My dead father has stolen his money which I inherited after his death?’

‘Certainly. He has stolen it, although you inherited it after his death.’ Osanyin was without mercy.

Aro, not knowing it was the witch doctor himself who had stolen the money, at last believed the faulty explanation. But before he gave up the matter, he and his friend the witch doctor went back to the bush. Aro stood on the very spot from which the money had been stolen, and he cursed with great anger the person who had stolen it. ‘My money will be recovered in the near or far future from whomsoever has stolen it, by my son, or my son’s son, or one of my generations!’

Then his friend the witch doctor reluctantly said, ‘Let your curse come to pass on whoever has stolen your money.’

Both returned to the village. The witch doctor worriedly returned to his house as if it had been revealed to Aro that Osanyin was the person who stole the money.

Now Aro started to live in poverty. As he and his only son grew older, their poverty grew worse. At last, Aro died of poverty and he left poverty for his son Jaye.

After some years’ struggle, Jaye married a very wretched lady, of whom no one could tell how or from where she had come to the village. And two years later, she bore a beautiful baby boy, who was named Ajaiyi. The father, mother and Ajaiyi were still growing poorer and poorer, and at last Ajaiyi’s mother died suddenly of poverty.

After several years’ hard work, Ajaiyi’s father Jaye became so poor and weary that he could not go and work on the farm any more. So Ajaiyi, his only son, took over from him. He toiled on his father’s farm just to feed the two of them.

Thus, Ajaiyi worked hard until he became thirty years of age, and he saw that all of his age-group had married. Therefore, one night it came to his mind to marry a lady just as his companions had done. He put it thus before his weary father: ‘My father, all my companions got married long ago. How can I get enough money to be able to marry as others have done?’

Ajaiyi’s father explained to him sadly, ‘According to our tradition, it is a father’s duty to make a marriage for his son. But as you know I am in great poverty. My poverty is so great that I have not had even a half-kobo for the past four years. So, my dear Ajaiyi, it is a great pity that I have no money with which to pay the dowry for you. I am sorry, indeed.’

Ajaiyi looked at the ceiling and thought about their poverty for some minutes, and then he left his father and went to the front of the house. He sat on the mud pavement and there began to weep bitterly.

In his grief, it came to Ajaiyi’s mind to pawn himself for money with which to pay the dowry of a lady. The following morning, he went to a wealthy pawnbroker, who gave him sufficient money, with which he married a beautiful lady the following week. And a few days after his marriage, he started to work on the farm of the pawnbroker from seven until eleven o’clock in the morning.

Some months later, Ajaiyi’s father fell seriously ill and died within a few days. Ajaiyi had no money to spend on the funeral ceremony for his father. Of course, as it was a great shame if he failed to perform the funeral ceremony, Ajaiyi was forced to go and pawn himself to another pawnbroker, who gave him money which he spent on his father’s funeral expenses.

Now Ajaiyi had pawned himself to two pawnbrokers. He was working for the first one from seven to eleven o’clock in the morning and for the second from noon to four o’clock in the afternoon. As Ajaiyi had only a few hours left to work on his own farm for his and his wife’s living, his inherited poverty became even more severe. His wife advised him one morning, ‘My husband, you had better go to Osanyin, the village witch doctor, and beg him to help you find out from his gods the causes of our poverty, and find out as well what can stop it.’

Without delay, Ajaiyi went to the village witch doctor. When Ajaiyi had explained his difficulties, the witch doctor consulted his gods at once. Then in a sharp voice, he deceived Ajaiyi: ‘My gods say that if you really want your poverty to stop, you must buy nine rams and nine empty sacks. You will put one of the rams into each of the sacks. Then, in the midnight, you will carry all to the grave of your father, and you will put all on top of the grave. But you must come and tell me as soon as you have put them there.’

The witch doctor explained further, ‘To be sure if your father has taken the rams, you will go back to the grave the following morning. If you meet only empty sacks on top of the grave, it means that your father has accepted the nine rams as his sacrifice. If that is so, first of all, greet yourself – “Good luck!” Then you must collect the empty sacks and put them in your room. Surely, the empty sacks will all be filled up with money by your dead father. The money will thenceforth relieve you of your inherited poverty and all your other miserable conditions. Now, Ajaiyi, before you leave for your house, greet yourself now, “Good luck!”’

‘Good luck to me!’ Ajaiyi shouted with smiles.

‘Yes, it is sure you will soon be a rich man, because my gods do not lie. And when a person has money, the people call him “Money man!”’ The witch doctor and Ajaiyi shouted together, laughing, ‘Money man!’

However, as Ajaiyi walked along the way to his house, he thought to himself perplexedly, ‘The witch doctor said I must sacrifice nine rams to my dead father before my poverty will stop. Hmm. I am sure I shall never be free from this inherited poverty because I have no money to buy even a small cock. How can I buy nine rams?’

‘What did the witch doctor tell you about our poverty, my husband?’ Ajaiyi’s wife inquired impatiently. When he told her everything that the witch doctor had told him to do, and told her further that he had no money with which to buy the rams and sacks, his wife shouted, ‘Ah! you said you have no money to buy the rams! And yet we become rich as soon as you give the rams to your dead father! Are you going to die in this poverty? Can’t you see, when you go here, you see “Money man!” You go there, you see “Money man!” And everywhere you go you see “Money man!” You must go and pawn yourself to the third pawnbroker, who will give you the money to buy the rams and the empty sacks.’

Ajaiyi protested in horror: ‘Pawn myself again for money? But I am afraid, you know. If I pawn myself again, how can I satisfy the three of them, and who will work for our living then?’

‘Never mind about our living,’ Ajaiyi’s wife advised him. ‘I believe that if you work hard, you will satisfy the three pawnbrokers!’

So the following day Ajaiyi reluctantly went to the third pawnbroker, who gave him 200 naira. Then he and his wife went to the market with the money. Unfortunately, 200 naira was insufficient to buy the nine rams and empty sacks. Having seen this, Ajaiyi was greatly perplexed. He told his wife they should return home with the money.

‘Oh, my husband,’ she advised him, ‘don’t let us return to the house with this money. We will spend it on another thing and our poverty will remain as before. Now, let us buy as many rams and sacks as the money can buy. Then, when you carry them to the grave of your father in the mid-night, you will explain before the grave that you will bring the rest as soon as your dead father helps you get the money to buy them. And I believe that your dead father will not refuse to accept the first instalment, because he knew well that he left you in great poverty.’

Ajaiyi, having thought his wife’s advice over and over, agreed reluctantly, with shrugs of his shoulders. He bought six rams and six empty sacks, and they carried them all back to their house.

It was hardly midnight when Ajaiyi put each of the rams alive inside one of the empty sacks. He carried them one by one to his father’s grave. When he had put them all on top of the grave, he explained, ‘My dead father, please accept these six rams as the first instalment, and I shall bring you the remaining three as soon as you help me get the money.’

Having said this, he went as directed to the witch doctor’s house and told Osanyin that he had carried the six rams to the grave.

‘Is that so? Ajaiyi, you have carried six rams to the grave? Oh, good for you!’ The witch doctor praised Ajaiyi with a cheerful voice and laughter. ‘You soon will become “Money man” then. Oh, very good for you. But you should not wait too long to carry the remaining three to the grave, you hear? All right, you can go back to your house. It is too dark to be out.’

Ajaiyi walked back to his house in the darkness. He hardly had left when the witch doctor, Osanyin, and his servants went to the grave and carried the six rams to his shrine. He killed all six for his food, and he gave the empty sacks to one of his servants to return to the grave before daybreak.

In the morning, Ajaiyi and his wife ran to the grave, and both were extremely happy when they met only the empty sacks on top of the grave. They believed at once that the dead father had taken the rams into his grave. With happiness, they collected the six empty sacks and returned to the house. Ajaiyi put the sacks in his room, and then he and his wife expected the dead father to fill them all with money.

When they had waited and waited many months, and Ajaiyi’s father still did not fill up the empty sacks with money, their poverty came to its lowest point. The three pawnbrokers were so annoyed that they dragged Ajaiyi here and there because he could not satisfy the three of them.

When he found life too harsh, Ajaiyi blamed his wife sorrowfully. ‘I told you in the market that day that we should return to the house with 200 naira when it was not sufficient to buy all nine rams at once. But you insisted we should buy as many as the money would buy!’

‘Ah, my husband, don’t let us give up hope yet,’ she advised him. ‘We must try hard to endure our difficulties. My advice is that you should go back to the witch doctor to help you find out from his gods why our poverty is worse than before we sacrificed the six rams to your dead father.’

Reluctantly, Ajaiyi went back to the witch doctor. He asked him the reason for the persistence of his poverty.

‘Ah, Ajaiyi,’ the witch doctor said, ‘your poverty cannot stop until you have taken the remaining three rams to your dead father!’

Frightened, Ajaiyi went back to his house. He told his wife what the witch doctor told him to do in order to end his poverty. In her confusion, she asked him, ‘But what are we going to do next to get money with which to buy the remaining rams and empty sacks?’

Ajaiyi answered her in great anger. ‘Well, you know we have not even one kobo in hand. So we can’t get money to buy three rams and three sacks. But now, all I am planning to do this midnight is go to visit my father in his grave.’

‘What are you going to tell him if you can visit him?’ Ajaiyi’s wife asked, afraid.

‘I shall ask him why he is demanding nine rams from me in order to set me free from the poverty which he left to me!’

‘But if he confirms it, what are you going to do for him?’

‘If he confirms it then I shall behead him, and then I shall come out of his grave.’

His wife objected to this dangerous proposal. ‘Please, never attempt to visit a dead person in his grave!’

Nevertheless, in the mid-night, Ajaiyi, having sharpened his long machete, took three empty sacks and went to the grave of his father. He filled up two of the sacks with sand in such a way that each seemed to contain a ram, and he laid both on top of the grave. Then he lay the third sack and his machete on top of the grave as well. Then he went to the witch doctor. He told him that he had put the remaining rams on top of the grave.

‘What a nice man you are, Ajaiyi,’ the witch doctor told him cheerfully. ‘I know, you are a young man who is fast in taking action on everything! Ah, good of you to have put the three rams on the grave as soon as possible. Now, put it in your mind that you will soon become “Money man”. But you must not forget to go and collect the empty sacks from the grave in the morning. That is all. Go back to your house now; the night is too dark!’

As soon as Ajaiyi left the witch doctor, he went back to the grave. He put the third sack near the two he had already filled up with sand. Holding his machete, he got inside it.

Now, inside the sack, he waited, expecting his father to drag the three sacks into the grave.

After about an hour, the witch doctor and his servants came in the darkness to the grave. His servants then carried the sacks to his house, and he followed them with a lamp in his hand. His servants had hardly put the three sacks down in front of his gods in the shrine before he took out his dagger and started to open the first sack, hoping to bring a ram out of it and then kill it.

He and his servants were greatly shocked when they saw the sand in the first sack, and then in the second sack as well. And he had hardly opened the third sack when Ajaiyi jumped out suddenly with his long machete. He raised the machete above his head.

‘What? Ajaiyi! You were in the sack,’ the witch doctor screamed as he and his servants defended their heads and faces with their hands.

Ajaiyi, scowling, stood firmly before the witch doctor, with the machete upraised, and said quietly, ‘Hun-un! my rams, because of which I have pawned myself to the third pawnbroker, and you – my dead father –’

‘Oh, Ajaiyi,’ the witch doctor said, ‘let me confess to you now. It was not your dead father who took all your rams, but I was the one who took them from the grave.’

‘But I believe you are my dead father,’ Ajaiyi shouted, threatening with his machete. ‘Therefore you are to set me free of my poverty this midnight!’

The frightened witch doctor cleared his throat, and then insisted, ‘Not at all! I am not your dead father. Therefore I have not the power to set you free from poverty!’

Ajaiyi, as if he had not heard, snatched the witch doctor’s right hand suddenly and asked loudly, ‘Tell me the truth! Will you set me free from my poverty this midnight or not?’

The witch doctor cried out in fear, closing his eyes tightly, ‘Ajaiyi, you look at me with angry eyes that frighten me even more than your long machete. Please look at me with cheerful eyes!’

‘I shall never look at you with cheerful eyes because one should look at a bad thing with bad eyes,’ Ajaiyi shouted. ‘A corpse is not looked at with cheerful eyes! You know that!’

‘But I am not dead or a corpse!’ the witch doctor cried, soaked with the sweat of fear.

‘Ah, you cannot say whether my machete will turn you into a corpse this midnight!’ Ajaiyi answered. ‘Just tell me the truth! Will you set me free of my poverty this midnight?’

‘No! Only your dead father has the power to set you free from your poverty,’ the witch doctor said, opening his eyes just as all his servants rushed against Ajaiyi suddenly. Now a fight started as the witch doctor and his servants tried to wrestle the machete from Ajaiyi’s hand. After a few minutes’ struggle all over the shrine, Ajaiyi overpowered them, striking them mercilessly with his machete.

Now Ajaiyi again grasped the right hand of the witch doctor, and began to drag him here and there in the shrine. When he began to shout for help, Ajaiyi closed his mouth with the flat part of the machete. All the servants kept quiet and stretched up their hands in fear. ‘Surely,’ Ajaiyi said, ‘you are my dead father who will set me free from my poverty this midnight. You are joking by telling me you are not a dead man!’

‘Joking? Joking on the point of death like this? Not at all!’

Ajaiyi swung his machete as if to cut off the witch doctor’s head. ‘Whether you are a dead man or not, show me where you keep your money!’

Willingly or not, the trembling witch doctor walked to the place in front of the gods where he had buried the two large water pots of money which he stole from the bush years ago, after he and Ajaiyi’s grandfather buried them under the Iroko tree. The money belonged to Ajaiyi’s grandfather.

As soon as the witch doctor pointed out the spot where he buried the two pitchers, Ajaiyu dug them out and swiftly carried them to his house that midnight.

When he and his wife counted the money, it was more than four thousand naira. So Ajaiyi and his wife were free from their poverty and other burdens, as soon as Ajaiyi refunded the money to the three pawnbrokers.





A Short Biography of Tortoise




A long, long time ago, when the eyes of people were dark, there lived in a big town a young man called Ajapa, or Tortoise, and his nickname was Alabahun.

In his early days, Tortoise was a hefty, handsome, and very promising young man. Ajapa the Tortoise was cheerful and playful at all times. Tortoise had wealthy parents. Because of this, he was badly indulged with everything from childhood.

Almost all the people of the town loved and trusted him because of all those enticing qualities which he possessed. The king especially was not happy any day that Tortoise failed to come and amuse him in the palace.

But Ajapa the Tortoise had hardly attained the age of thirty when he became suddenly cunning, cruel, selfish, audacious and treacherous. Worse still, as time went on, he also became the greatest liar, villain, thief and traitor who was ever born in the land.

Now, as Tortoise had changed suddenly from good young man to bad young man, the people began to hate him for his bad behaviour. And as he became more and more corrupt, the king expelled him from the town. So he went and settled in a town called Olomu. Being a thief, he joined a gang of robbers there.

Very soon Ajapa the Tortoise conspired with his gang so that they came to his former town, Mosan, and robbed many people of their personal property. And within a few months, they had, in the midnights, robbed almost all the property and also the domestic animals of the people.

Now the people of the town were confused as to who were the culprits. They did not know who were the thieves among them. For this reason they had no rest of mind each night. They did not know it was Tortoise, who had been expelled, and his gang, who were the robbers who robbed them of their property.

After a while, Tortoise and his gang stopped robbing them, as the people had been relieved of their property.

One midnight, Ajapa the Tortoise entered inside a specially made huge water pot. He told his gang to carry the strange water pot to the front of the palace of the king of Mosan town. As soon as his gang had put it down there, he whispered to them, ‘All of you go and hide yourselves somewhere, but near me.’ They all went to a corner and hid themselves there in the darkness.

Then Tortoise, with a fearful and strange voice, shouted, ‘Ho-o-o! Ro-Ro-o, Ro-o-o! Let you king of Mosan and your counsellors and bearers, come out now and worship me! I am your ancestor who came from heaven this midnight! Come out now; otherwise, you the king will join me in heaven this midnight!’

Without hesitation, the king, his counsellors and bearers rushed to the outside and went to the strange water pot with great fear. At the same time, the king and his people knelt down in front of the water pot. With fear and with trembling body, they began to rub their palms as they were saying, ‘Ah, our ancestor, here we are in front of you. We thank you so much that you are so kind, and love us so that you pay us a visit this midnight. Ah, we thank you heartily and with great happiness!’

‘Ho-o-o! Ro-Ro-o, Ro-o-o! I am your ancestor who left the crown and royal staff, the coral beads and the money, all of which you, the king, have inherited after me! Ho-o-o! Ro-Ro-Ro-o, Ro-o-o! Let the king and his bearers go and bring all here now! I am going to renew all for you! They are too old! Ho-o-o! Ro-Ro-o, Ro-o-ol!’ Tortoise frightened the king and his people with a horrible voice.

The eyes of the people of those days were dark, and they had no strong second thoughts. The king, his counsellors and his hefty bearers believed at once that it was the king’s ancestor who was inside the strange huge water pot and was talking to them from it. So they ran impatiently into the palace. As they were so impatient with fear, they could not take time to find the key of the room in which the crown, the staff of office, the money, the coral beads, the clothing and the other royal property were kept. But they hastily broke open the door of the room with an axe.

Without hesitation, the king and his people brought all the things out and put them in front of the water pot.

‘Here is all of the royal property! Please, accept all these things,’ the king pleaded carefully as he was rubbing his palms with respect, ‘and let me live longer on the throne. Please send peace in return to the town!’

‘Ho-o-o! Ro-Ro-o, Ro-o-o! Leave them there and go back peacefully to the palace,’ Tortoise commanded with a horrible voice.

The king and his people had hardly entered the palace when Tortoise jumped out from the strange water pot, and his gang came out of their hiding place. Without wasting one second, one of them put the empty pot on his head, while Tortoise and the others carried all the property, and then they all disappeared into the darkness in a moment. Thus Tortoise, with his cunning, duped the king, who had expelled him, out of the royal property.

Having carried the property to Olomu town, Tortoise and his gang sold the crown to the king of Olomu town and the other property to the people of the same Olomu town for a large sum of money. Then Tortoise and his gang lavishly wasted all the money within a few days.

As time went on, one day some of the people of Mosan town saw their king’s crown on the head of the king of Olomu town, the day that he was celebrating the day of his ancestors.

Very soon, the people brought news to their king. And the following day, the king of Mosan town sent a messenger to the king of Olomu town asking him to surrender the crown immediately. But he sent the messenger back, saying he would not surrender it because he had bought it from someone.

After several exchanges of hot words, the king still would not release the crown. So the king of Mosan town started to prepare to fight him in order to get his crown back by any means.

As the king of Mosan town was preparing for the fight secretly, Ajapa the Tortoise and traitor hinted to the king of Olomu that the king of Mosan town was preparing for war against him. So as soon as Tortoise had so hinted, the king of Olomu too started to prepare his soldiers for the fight or war.

One month later, the soldiers of the king of Olomu town first besieged Mosan town. But the soldiers of Mosan town did not waste time. They retaliated at once. They fought their enemies so gallantly that their winning was soon imminent.

Now Tortoise, having seen that the soldiers of his former town Mosan would conquer the soldiers of Olomu town, joined the battle and started to help fight his people, for he was a very great traitor.

The soldiers of Mosan town fought so bravely that they got the crown of their king back, but later Tortoise, the traitor, told the enemies the place where the soldiers kept their fighting weapons. Now the soldiers of Olomu town stole the weapons easily with the hope that the victory would soon be to their side. But to their horror, the soldiers of Mosan town were not affected at all. Instead, it was when their weapons were stolen that they fought more fiercely.

Within four months the soldiers of Olomu town were nearly all killed. Many of them were captured, and Tortoise was captured as well. When he was brought to the king of Mosan town with the other captives, he was taken to the shrine of the gods. There, they bound him with a strong rope, and then they laid him flat in front of the gods.

As soon as the war was over the king of Mosan town wanted to know who had told their enemies the place where they kept their weapons, because there was no time in history when their enemies had known the place of the weapons and stolen them. The king invited all the people to the assembly ground and told them about their stolen weapons with wonder. ‘As all of you know well, our weapons were never stolen by our enemies before!’

‘We were surprised!’ the people shouted.

The king pointed his hand to Tortoise and showed him to the people. ‘Look at this handsome man, Tortoise. He is the traitor who betrayed us to our enemies!’

‘Ah, you Tortoise,’ the crowd shouted as they fastened their eyes on him. ‘Woe unto you! You traitor! Let us behead him now!’ they added as the king’s bearers laid him flat in front of the gods.

‘No! we shall not behead him,’ the king answered. Then he explained, ‘His offence is too severe for beheading; A curse has more weight than beheading!’

‘We are agreed, your majesty! Please curse him now!’ the people shouted with the voice of approval.

‘Please, king,’ Ajapa the Tortoise begged with tears. ‘I have become your slave as from today! Please, I beg you!’

The king answered, ‘You, Tortoise, whose nickname is Alabahun, the son of the soil, have betrayed the people of your town to their enemies. And that is the offence for which you will be punished now!’ Then the king turned to the gods in front of which Tortoise lay, and the king gave a number of roars of anger: ‘Oh, gods of our land and our ancestors, let you all turn Tortoise from a handsome man into the Shell-man, and let his clothes be shell as from today and let him crawl in the forest now!’

To the fear and surprise of the crowd of people, the king hardly had cursed Tortoise when he shrank to a very small shell-creature. And as a Shell-man he crawled into the forest, while the people shouted at him, ‘Go into the forest, you Shell-man, the traitor!’ It was that day that Ajapa the Tortoise became one of the beast race. Then the crowd of people returned to their houses.

Tortoise or Shell-man wandered about from one forest to another for several years. One morning he wandered to an umbrella tree. He stopped under the tree and waited for fruit that he could eat to fall down.

But as he was waiting there, he saw a Beetle-lady who was aloof, coming to the same umbrella tree. ‘Who is this beautiful Beetle-lady?’ the Shell-man wondered confusedly as he fastened his eyes on the Beetle-lady. A few minutes later, the Beetle-lady crawled to the tree just to eat the fruit. When she came there, the Shell-man greeted her: ‘Hello, Beetle-lady! How are you?’

‘I’m all right,’ replied the Beetle-lady.

‘But you seem as if you have once been a human being,’ the Shell-man said with confusion.

‘Of course, you are right. I was once a human being, but it was my beauty which changed me into a Beetle-lady as you see me now,’ she explained with sadness.

‘Though you still retain your beauty. How did your beauty change you into a Beetle-lady?’ he asked with wonder.

‘You see, several years ago I was Yanribo, the most beautiful lady in the city. The king of the city forced me to carry a sacrifice to the camp of the soldiers. But because I was afraid of being killed or taken as a slave by those soldiers, I threw the sacrifice into the forest when I had trekked half-way. But the sacrifice had hardly touched the ground when I was turned into a Beetle-lady. And it is since that day that I have been wandering about from one forest to another.’ The Beetle-lady told her story sadly, and the Shell-man shook his head sadly too.

‘Hmm. But your beauty, which was the cause of your changing to Beetle-lady, is good. As you see me, I was the greatest villain, liar, cunning man, thief and traitor alive when I was in my town. I was cursed by the king of my town because of my bad behaviour. And the curse of the king turned me into a Shell-man suddenly, and then I crawled into the forest immediately.’ Thus Tortoise explained himself to the Beetle-lady, and she shook her head sadly.

‘But as you are a Beetle-lady, and I am a Shell-man, I wish that we should marry each other,’ suggested the Shell-man.

‘But who will be our match-maker?’ the Beetle-lady asked.

‘Hmm. You know, you are the first generation of the Beetle-lady, and I am the first generation of the Shell-man. So we cannot get a match-maker. But as we stand under this tree now, we shall soon get something which will substitute for a match-maker.’ The Shell-man, Tortoise, with his usual tricks, hardly said so when one ripe fruit fell down. He picked the fruit up, he twitched a bit of it, and then he gave it to the Beetle-lady to twitch as well. When she twitched a bit of it, then he said, ‘Yes, this fruit is our match-maker. Because you have twitched it and I did the same thing. It has given my love to you and yours to me, and the work of a match-maker is no more than that.’ The Shell-man, with his cunning, persuaded the Beetle-lady and she was satisfied.

‘OK. That is that. But who will pray for us like father and mother?’ the Beetle-lady asked.

‘Hmm. Let us wait here for some minutes more and you will see who will pray for us,’ the Shell-man said with smiles, and he flirted with her, but he was serious about marrying her.

Very soon, a big bird perched on the tree, and as it was struggling to eat the fruit, about fifty fell down. These the Shell-man gathered all on one spot. He hardly had done so when about twenty monkeys arrived. They came to eat the fruit. Two of them were very old apes, a male and a female.

The Shell-man, with his cunning, received them as his guests. He told them to sit round the fruit which he had gathered into one place. He and his Beetle-lady sat side by side in the circle. Then he begged the two old apes to pray for the Beetle-lady and himself. Then both prayed for them as if they were their father and mother. Afterwards, all of them started to sing and they ate the fruit.

After a while, they stood up and danced merrily for some minutes, and that meant that the Shell-man, Tortoise, and the Beetle-lady, Yanribo, had married each other. Then the Beetle-lady became the Beetle-woman as from that day.

Then the Beetle-woman carried the rest of the fruit, and they all danced away.





A Short Biography of Yanribo, Tortoise’s Wife




Some hundred years ago, there lived in a city a lady who was called Yanribo. Yanribo’s father was very rich in money and domestic animals, and so also was her mother. Yanribo’s beauty had started when she was a baby in the cradle. In her babyhood, her father and mother’s neighbours were scrambling just to enjoy her beauty for some minutes before returning her to her mother.

In her city, she was the most beautiful of all babies. And the older she grew, the greater was her beauty. She became the best singer as well, with her golden voice to which people danced until they were entirely exhausted. Yanribo was also the best dancer ever produced in the land.

Yanribo’s beauty was a strong magnet which attracted every bachelor who opened his eyes and saw her. The more Yanribo dressed in rags or even leaves, the more she became more beautiful. It was her beauty which gave great fame and respect to her city. The people of the city even often remarked, ‘Yanribo’s beauty is indeed the pride of the city.’ Yanribo was cheerful and her face was always full of smiles. Though Yanribo was created with extra beauty, she still gave due respect to both rich and poor people.

But there was one thing which spoiled Yanribo. She was the greatest coward in the city.

As time went on, and Yanribo was just into her eighteenth year, it happened that a strong war was about to break out between Yanribo’s city and another town. This town, Abatan, was not so far from Yanribo’s city or land.

The king of Abatan had a large number of soldiers while the king of Yanribo’s city had few. Now as the war was nearer, the soldiers of Abatan moved from their town and camped at a distance of about two kilometres from Yanribo’s city. The king of the city was sure that his soldiers were so few that he could not conquer the soldiers of Abatan except by some other means than force. So in order to conquer his enemies without losing too many souls, he and his counsellors consulted their gods. The gods told them the right kind of sacrifice which they could prepare and take to the camp of their enemies. The sacrifice would scare away the enemies.

Their gods assured them that if the ingredients of the sacrifice were complete, and that if it was placed in the circle of the enemies, they would flee back to their town Abatan immediately.

Though the sacrifice consisted of many different kinds of scarce ingredients, the king and his counsellors tried hard and got all of them within a few days.

Then, after all of the ingredients, including one big beetle, had been put inside a large beautiful calabash, and it had been covered with its lid, the king and his counsellors began to puzzle about the right person to carry the sacrifice to the camp and put it in the circle of the soldiers or enemies.

After a while, it came to their minds to consult their gods once more to find out the right person to carry the sacrifice. In reply, their gods told them that only the most beautiful lady who had not yet ‘known man’ should carry the sacrifice.

But the gods warned them, ‘The carrier of the sacrifice should walk with the sacrifice on her head into the circle of soldiers and put it in their circle! If the carrier of the sacrifice,’ the gods emphasized, ‘does not carry it to the camp, but instead throws it into the forest half-way with the intention of returning from there and deceiving the king and his counsellors that she has taken it to the camp, then she will suddenly turn into a big beetle, and from there the changeling will crawl into the forest.’

Now, when the king and his counsellors, among whom was Yanribo’s father, Adio, had heard the order of their gods, all became sluggish at once. The matter of ‘who will bell the cat?’ arose. The king looked into the eyes of the counsellors, except those of Yanribo’s father, Adio, and the counsellors looked at the floor rather than speak out.

But Adio grew pale; his eyes were red as fire this time. For he knew that his daughter, Yanribo, was the most beautiful in the land, and that she was the lady whom the gods had chosen to carry the sacrifice. And neither the king nor the counsellors could talk this time, but all were shaking their heads momentarily with sadness.

‘Perhaps, as the king has many slaves, our gods may choose one of them to carry the sacrifice,’ suddenly one of the counsellors suggested.

‘Oh, yes,’ they all shouted, ‘you have a good memory to remember the king’s slaves. Right now, let us go back to our gods and ask them is it proper and if a slave has the right to carry the sacrifice!’ They then rushed impatiently into the shrine of the gods. They asked if a slave could be substituted in place of Yanribo. But the gods said ‘No! Only the daughter of the soil, and the most beautiful one!’

Then, in confusion, all returned to the sacrifice. They stood in front of it uncertainly, and after a while, and without saying goodbye to one another, they dispersed. Everyone went to his house quietly, and Adio, Yanribo’s father, went back to his house as well.

But as this matter was still burning the minds of the king and the other counsellors, in the mid-night and without inviting Adio, Yanribo’s father, they went to the king secretly. They and the king discussed how they could persuade Adio to surrender his daughter to carry the sacrifice.

The king, fearful, said, ‘I am afraid, and I am not bold enough to tell Adio to surrender his daughter to carry the sacrifice.’

‘I am bold enough to tell him so, if the king will support me,’ one senior counsellor boasted.

‘Indeed, I shall support you if you can bring the matter before him,’ the king promised, impatiently.

Then the king sent one of his bearers to go and call Yanribo’s father, Adio, to him. Within a few minutes the bearer returned with Adio to the palace.

Adio greeted the king and the counsellor, and then he sat down. ‘Yes, I am here now. But what did the king call me for?’ He turned to the king and the other counsellors with sulky eyes.

The senior counsellor began, ‘You know. We still find it difficult to get the most beautiful lady, like Yanribo, in this our land who is to carry the sacrifice. But, as you know, your – your – your daugh-ter, Yan-Yan-Yanri-bo, is the most be-be-be-beautiful in-in – the land. We – we – shall be – be – be grateful if you – you – you will sur-sur-surrender her to – to – to carry the sacrifice.’ The counsellor stammered with fear as he scowled at the floor.

‘Who has sent you here to tell me that?’ Adio frowned at the senior counsellor and roared horribly.

‘The – the – the ki-ing, the king has – has – has told me to – to – to tell you so!’ Now both the senior counsellor and the king scowled at the floor.

Then the king spoke with pretended anger, ‘In my presence, are you telling lies about me, you a senior counsellor like you?’

‘But you have instructed me to tell him so!’ The senior counsellor frowned at the king.

‘No! Not I!’ The king beat his breast and shouted with fear.

Yanribo’s father, Adio, stood up and shouted wildly at them, ‘Eh! Stop all your arguments! Whether it was the king who has told you or not, I shall agree to surrender my daughter, Yanribo, provided that every one of the counsellors and the king will surrender one of his daughters. If they fail to do so, then I shall never agree to surrender my own daughter, Yanribo!’

‘Hmm!’ The king and the other counsellors murmured all at one time, and then everyone shook his head disapprovingly.

Having seen that the king and the other counsellors were not pleased to surrender their own daughters, Adio stood up wildly and with great anger shouted horribly, ‘All of you are seducers! Villains! And treacherous men!’ Then he went out.

‘Hmm!’ The king and the other counsellors dropped their heads heavily upon their chests and murmured confusedly with fear as soon as Adio had walked out angrily.

The king at last raised his head up and asked quietly from the counsellors, ‘But what is the next step that we can take now, now that Yanribo’s father has refused to surrender Yanribo?’

Then all of the counsellors raised their heads up. Now the senior one suggested, ‘There is nothing else we can do to change Adio’s mind, to surrender his daughter. But I suggest that this midnight the king’s bearers should go and kidnap Yanribo from her father’s house. If the deed is successful, then before daybreak we shall force her to carry the sacrifice to the camp of your enemies.’

‘Oh, yes, your suggestion is worth more than a million pounds!’ The king and the other counsellors were happy now.

Without hesitation, the king sent some of his hefty bearers to go and kidnap Yanribo from her father’s house. And, within a few minutes, the bearers carried Yanribo, her mouth bound with rags, to the palace.

Then the king and the counsellors hastily dressed Yanribo with the finest clothes, and put the finest coral beads on her neck and wrists. Now, Yanribo looked even more beautiful than before.

Before daybreak, they put the beautiful large calabash of the sacrifice on to her head. Then they started to draw her gently to the edge of the city. When they drew her to the road leading to the camp of their enemies, they led her a little distance until they were sure she could not trace her way back to the city. Then they removed the rags with which they had bound her mouth to prevent her from shouting. Having told her to carry the sacrifice along that road, they returned to the palace still before daybreak.

But as soon as Yanribo had seen that the king and his counsellors had returned to the palace, she stopped half-way, and, with the intention of returning from there to her parents, she threw the sacrifice into the forest.

Unfortunately for her, the sacrifice had hardly touched the ground, when Yanribo turned suddenly into a big beetle. And without hesitation, she, as the beetle, crawled into the forest. So it was that since that midnight Yanribo became the Beetle-lady.

But in the morning, when Yanribo’s father, mother and all those who loved her knew that the king and his counsellors had forced Yanribo to carry the sacrifice, and that she had turned into the Beetle-lady, they started to burn the houses of the counsellors, and they also burnt the king together with his palace in protest. After a few days, this revolt became a serious civil war which, at the end, ruined the whole city. Though Yanribo had turned into the Beetle-lady, her beauty had at the end ruined the city for ever.





Ajao and the Active Bone




A long time ago, there lived a man in a small town. His name was Ajao. He was an expert trickster and deceiver and, because of his profession, everyone in the town took him to be the most useless man in the town.

One year, there was a great famine. Within a few months after the famine had started, there was nothing for the people to eat.

One day, as Ajao was wandering about on the outskirts of the town, looking for food to eat, he came upon the shrine of a god. He eagerly entered it with the hope that, at least, there would be a sacrifice and he could satisfy his hunger with it. But to his disappointment there was nothing like a sacrifice, except one old bone which was half stuck into the sand before the god who was the occupant of the shrine.

The bone was not an ordinary one, but a small god.

Unknowing, Ajao ran to the bone and picked it up immediately. As he was about to leave the shrine he heard a horrible caution from one corner of the shrine: ‘Eh! Don’t take that bone away! It is not an ordinary bone as you suppose it to be! Come and put it back in the very spot you have taken it from!’

Ajao was greatly afraid and confused when he heard this warning. He glanced at every corner of the shrine, but nobody was there except the huge god. Nevertheless, as Ajao had not eaten anything for the past few days, he did not pay heed to the horrible warning. Instead, he stubbornly ran with the bone to his house.

Ajao entered his room and shut the door; then he began to chew the bone greedily. To his surprise, as he was still enjoying it, it fell from his hand. And as he was just stretching his hand to pick it up, the bone became active suddenly. It immediately began to throw itself along the ground.

Ajao began to chase it along, trying to pick it up in order to continue to chew it.

Thus the bone was throwing itself along and along until it left the town and came to a big river which was at a little distance from the town. Instead of stopping on the bank of the river, this wonderful bone flung itself into the river and, without hesitation, it sank.

Ajao jumped in the river as well. He dived, and he continued to chase the bone along the bottom of the river.

After a while, the bone disappeared, and Ajao was carried to the deepest part of the river by the current. To his surprise, within a few seconds, he found himself unexpectedly inside a massive building. The massive building was under the river, and it belonged to the Nymph or Water Spirit who governed the river.

‘Who are you?’ the Nymph asked, astonished.

‘I am the son of man,’ Ajao replied with a trembling voice.

‘What do you want here, the son of man?’ the Nymph shouted.

Ajao fearfully explained. ‘Thank you, Nymph. You see, there is a great famine in my town now. So as I was chewing the only bone which I found in a shrine, it mistakenly fell down from my hand. Then it began to throw itself till it flung itself into the river, and I followed it. I simply found myself in this your massive building unexpectedly.’

‘Is that so?’ the Nymph wondered greatly to see that Ajao was so hungry for food that he chased a bone to her house which was under the river.

‘It is so,’ Ajao replied painfully.

‘All right, take this wooden spoon. When you return to your house, ask it to do your work for you. But never come back to me for anything as from today!’ The Nymph gave a wonderful wooden spoon to Ajao which would supply him with every kind of delicious food and drink.

Ajao thanked the Nymph when she gave the wooden spoon to him. Then she told him to sit on a chair, and he had hardly done so when he found himself on the bank of the river. From there he went to his house with the spoon.

As soon as he entered his room, he asked the spoon: ‘Do your work now, wooden spoon!’ And he had hardly asked thus when the room was full of all kinds of delicious food and drink. Then greedily he and his family ate and drank to their entire satisfaction.

In the following morning, instead of keeping the secret of the wonderful wooden spoon within himself, Ajao went to the king. He told him to invite all the people of the town to his palace.

‘For what reason, Ajao, shall I invite all the people to my palace?’ The king was suspicious because he knew Ajao as an expert trickster and deceiver.

‘I wish to feed them with delicious food and drink!’ Ajao replied with pride.

‘You, Ajao, want to feed the people of the town with food and drink in this time of great famine? Or you cannot remember what you came to me for?’ The king was still mistrustful.

‘I say I have enough food and drink to give to all the people!’ Ajao confirmed loudly.

The king still doubted. ‘But I am afraid, Ajao. Even I as king of this town have not eaten now for over four days. How much stranger it is for a poor person like you to get sufficient food and drink to give to all the people!’

‘Your majesty, just do what I am asking you to do,’ Ajao said, compelling the king with his sweet voice.

So in the evening the king’s bell-ringer announced to the people of the town that they should gather on the assembly ground which was in front of the palace. And immediately all the people gathered on the assembly ground while the king sat in the middle of the crowd of people. All were waiting for Ajao to come.

After a while, Ajao came with the wooden spoon, and in the presence of the people and the king and his chiefs, he commanded the spoon loudly: ‘My wooden spoon, do your work now for these people!’

And Ajao had hardly commanded like that when everyone saw the delicious food and drink in front of him or her. Then greedily the people, the king and the chiefs ate and drank as much as they could.

But after a while, when they were intoxicated by the drinks, they started to play so roughly that they did not know when they smashed the wonderful spoon and it split. So the people and Ajao did not think about the spoon. When they became tired, everyone walked sluggishly back to his or her house, with the hope of coming back in the following morning to eat and drink as before.

On the following morning, all the people, the king and the chiefs gathered again on the assembly ground. They were waiting for their breakfast when Ajao arrived. When he came, because he was late, he hastily commanded the wooden spoon to do its usual work. But unfortunately it failed to supply food and drink. He tried all his best, but the spoon could not supply anything because it had split when the people trampled on it the night before.

The people and the king exclaimed angrily, ‘You are an expert deceiver, Ajao, as we already know. We believe you have commanded the spoon not to supply food and drink for us!’

‘I think it is powerless to supply food and drink as it was split yesternight,’ Ajao suggested to the people with fear.

‘If it is so, you had better go back to the same Nymph and tell her to give you another spoon,’ the people roared impatiently.

‘I am sorry, but the Nymph has already warned me not to come back to her for anything again!’ Ajao explained.

‘Don’t deceive or trick us, Ajao!’ the king warned Ajao. ‘Go back to her and, I believe, she will give you another spoon if you show her the split one. But if you refuse to go back to her, it means you disobey my order. So for that you will be beheaded!’ Thus the king forced Ajao to go back.

‘Oh, my head!’ Ajao exclaimed, beginning to blame himself as he started to return to the Nymph reluctantly. ‘If I had known, I should not have told the king anything about the wooden spoon. Instead, I should have been using it secretly for my family and myself.’

When he got to the Nymph, he showed her the split spoon and he explained to her how the people had split it carelessly.

‘Oh, is that how you are, the son of man? All right, I will teach all of you sense today. Take this long whip, and it will serve you satisfactorily even better than the wooden spoon!’ With great annoyance, the Nymph gave the whip to Ajao.

‘But this is a whip,’ Ajao said with a doubtful mind. ‘And as far as I understand, the only work of a whip is flogging people.’

‘No, this whip is not meant so in this case,’ the Nymph explained indirectly. ‘It can also produce a lovely music to which all of you will dance merrily, and none of you will say goodbye to one another when leaving your assembly ground. Goodbye, son of man.’

Then Ajao thanked her and left in confusion. But he went to his own house first, instead of going to the king and the people. He gathered his family hastily in the room, as they felt all near to dying from hunger. He commanded the whip: ‘Do your work now, whip.’

Ajao had hardly commanded the whip when it began to flog him and his family. When it had flogged them severely for nearly one hour, then it stopped flogging them.

‘Yes,’ Ajao said with grief within himself, ‘as the people, the king and his chiefs enjoyed the delicious food and drinks which the wooden spoon supplied yesterday, so they will share the punishment which this whip supplies instead of food and drink!’

Then immediately Ajao took the whip from the floor and went to the assembly ground. The hungry people, the king, and the chiefs were very happy when he returned to them as early as they wanted him to.

Ajao gave the whip to the king. He told him to ask it to do its work, and after that he hastily bolted away.

The king had hardly asked the whip to do its work when it began to flog him and his chiefs and the people. The whip flogged them so severely that not one of them could remember how he or she managed to leave there, and, as the king was running away for his life, his crown fell off his head – but he was unable to wait and take it back.

Thus the whip taught all of the town not to be careless next time.

A few days later, after the king saw that the people had rested their minds, he invited Ajao to his palace. Angrily, he asked Ajao, ‘Why did you bring the cruel whip instead of the kindly wooden spoon?’

‘Well, you see, that was the right thing that the Nymph gave to me instead of the wooden spoon, and that meant she taught us a lesson: that we must take good care of whatever might be given to us,’ Ajao explained calmly.

‘Yes, of course, if we were not careless, the wooden spoon would still be serving us – especially at this time when the great famine continues to besiege our town,’ the king remarked quietly, when he realized their mistake.





Don’t Pay Bad for Bad




Dola and Babi were good friends in their days. Both were young ladies, and they had loved each other heartily from when they were children. They always wore the same kind of dress, and they went together everywhere in their village, and to other villages as well. They did everything together, so much so that anyone who did not know their parents believed they were twins.

So Dola and Babi went about together until when they grew to be the age for marriage. Because they loved each other so much, they decided within themselves to marry two men who were born of the same mother and father, and who lived together in the same house, so that they might be with each other always.

Luckily, a few days after Dola and Babi decided to do so, they heard of two young men who were born of the same mother and father, and who lived together in the same house. So Babi married one of the young men while Dola married the second one, who was older than the first one. So Dola and Babi were very happy now, living together as they had before they had been married in their husbands’ house.

A few days after their marriage, Dola cleared a part of the front of the house very neatly. She sowed one kola-nut on the spot. After some weeks the kola-nut shot up. Then she filled up one earthen jar with water and she put it before her new kola-nut tree. Then every early morning, Dola would go and kneel down before the tree and jar. She would pray to the tree to help her to get a baby very soon, and after the prayer, she would drink some of the water which was inside the earthen jar. After that, she would go back to her room before the other people in the house woke. Dola did this early every morning, because she believed that there was a certain spirit who came and blessed the kola-nut tree and the water in the night.

After some months, the kola-nut tree grew to the height of about one metre. But now the domestic animals of the village began to eat the leaves of the tree and this hindered its growth.

One morning, Babi met Dola abruptly as she knelt down before the kola-nut tree and jar and prayed. After she had prayed and then stood up, Babi asked in surprise, ‘Dola, what were you telling your kola-nut tree?’

‘Oh, this kola-nut tree is my god, and I ask it every morning to help me get a baby soon,’ Dola explained calmly, pointing a finger at the tree and jar.

When Babi noticed that the animals of the village had eaten nearly all the leaves of the tree, she went back to her room. She took the top part of her large water pot, the bottom of which had broken away. She gave it to Dola, and she told her to shield her kola-nut tree with it so that the animals wouldn’t be able to eat its leaves again.

Dola took the large pot from her and thanked her fervently. Then she shielded her tree with it, and as from that morning the animals were unable to eat the leaves of the tree. And so it was growing steadily in the centre of the large pot.

A few years later, the tree yielded the first kola-nuts. The first kola-nuts that the tree yielded were of the best quality in the village, and because the nuts were the best quality, the kola-nut buyers hastily bought all the nuts, paying a considerable amount of money. Similarly, when the tree yielded the second and third kola-nuts, the buyers bought them with large amounts of money as before.

In selling the kola-nuts, Dola became a wealthy woman within a short period. Having seen this, Babi became jealous of Dola’s wealth.

Jealously, Babi demanded back the water pot: ‘Dola, will you please return my large water pot to me this morning?’

Dola was greatly shocked. She asked, ‘What? The broken water pot without a bottom?’

‘Yes, my broken water pot. I want to take it back this morning,’ Babi replied with a jealous voice.

‘Well, the water pot cannot be returned to you at this time unless I break it into pieces before it can come from around my kola-nut tree,’ Dola replied with a dead voice.

‘You must not break it or split the head of my water pot before you return it to me!’ Babi shouted angrily.

‘I say it cannot be taken away from the tree without breaking it or cutting the tree down,’ Dola explained angrily.

Babi boomed on Dola: ‘Yes, you may cut your tree down if you wish to do so. But all I want from you is my water pot!’

Dola reminded Babi with a calm voice, ‘Please, Babi, I remind you now that both of us started our friendship when we were children. Because of that, don’t try to take your water pot back at his time.’

‘Yes, of course, I don’t forget at any time that we are friends. But at all costs, I want the water pot now,’ Babi insisted with a great noise.

That revealed to Dola at last that Babi simply wanted to destroy her kola-nut tree so that she might not get the nuts from it to sell any more. She went to the chief of the village. She begged him to help her persuade Babi not to take the head of her water pot back.

However, when the chief of the village failed to persuade Babi not to take the water pot back from Dola, he judged the case in favour of Babi and said that Dola must return the water pot to her.

Then to her sorrow, Dola’s kola-nut tree was cut down, and the water pot was taken away from the tree without breaking, and Dola returned it to Babi. Now, Babi was very happy and she burst out laughing not because of the water pot but because Dola’s kola-nut tree had been cut down, as she believed that Dola would not get kola-nuts to sell again.

As soon as the water pot was returned to Babi, she and Dola entered the house and they continued their friendship, for Dola did not show in her behaviour towards Babi that her tree which had been cut down was a great sorrow for her.

A few months after the tree was cut down, Babi was delivered of a female baby. And on the morning that the baby was named, Dola gave her a fine brass ring as a present. Dola told Babi to put the ring on the baby’s neck, brass being one of the most precious metals in those days.

Babi, with laughter, took the brass ring from Dola, and with great admiration she put it on the baby’s neck immediately. And this brass ring so much beautified the baby that, from her beautiful look, now it seemed as if she was created with it. The brass ring was carefully moulded without any joint.

Then ten years passed away like one day. One fine morning, as the baby – who was by then a daughter – was celebrating her tenth birthday, Dola walked gently into Babi’s sitting room and said, ‘Babi, my good friend. I shall be very glad if you will return my brass ring this morning.’ Dola smiled to see that Babi’s guests were silent with shock.

Babi stood up suddenly, scowling, and shouted, ‘Which brass ring?’

‘My brass ring which is on your daughter’s neck now.’ Dola pointed a finger at Babi’s daughter’s neck, explaining as if she were simply joking.

‘This very brass ring which is on my daughter’s neck now?’ Babi, after clearing her throat, shouted to show disapproval of Dola’s demand: ‘Dola! You are joking!’

Dola scowled and replied softly, ‘I am not joking in any way, and I want you to return my brass ring now.’

Babi grunted like a pig, ‘Hmm!’ and begged with extreme misery and with tears rolling down her cheeks, ‘Please, my good friend, don’t try to take your brass ring back now. As you know, before the ring can be taken away from my daughter’s neck, her head will be cut off first because it is already bigger than the ring!’

‘I don’t tell you to cut off the head of your daughter, but all I want is my brass ring, and I want it without cutting it.’

At last, when Dola still insisted on taking her brass ring back, Babi went to the same chief of the village. She told him that Dola was attempting to kill her daughter.

Fortunately, the chief judged the case in favour of Dola when she explained to him how her kola-nut tree was cut down when Babi insisted on taking her water pot back ten years ago.

And in the judgement the chief added that the head of Babi’s daughter would be cut off on the assembly ground which was in front of his palace, and also in the presence of all the people of the village, so that everyone might learn that jealousy was bad. Then a special day was fixed for beheading the daughter.

When the day was reached, and after all the people of the village had gathered on the assembly ground, and the chief and his prominent people had been seated, then the chief called Babi loudly. He told her to put her ten-year-old daughter in the middle of the circle, and she obeyed. She and her daughter stood wobbling with fear while the swordsman, who was ready to behead the daughter, stood fiercely behind the daughter with a long dazzling sword in his hand.

The crowd of people, prominent people, and the chief were so overwhelmed by mercy that all were quiet suddenly while looking at the poor innocent daughter and her mother Babi, who looked thin and gaunt.

It was some minutes before the chief could reluctantly announce to Babi loudly, ‘Now, Babi, today is Dola’s day. Just as Dola’s kola-nut tree was cut down ten years ago when you insisted and took back the head of your water pot from her, it is so that the head of your daughter will be cut off now, when Dola’s brass ring will be taken away from the neck of your daughter and then it will be given back to Dola!’ The gathering mumbled with grief, and then all became quiet at once.

Then as the chief closed his eyes with grief, he gave the order to the swordsman to behead Babi’s daughter. But, just as the swordsman raised his sword up to cut the head off, Dola hastily stopped him by pulling his arm down, and then she announced loudly, ‘It will be a great pity if this daughter of mine is killed, because she has not offended me. No! It was her jealous mother.

‘And I believe, if we continue to pay “bad” for “bad”, bad will never finish on earth. Therefore, I forgive Babi all that she has done to my kola-nut tree of which she was jealous!’

The chief and the rest of the people clapped and shouted loudly with happiness when they heard this announcement from Dola. Then everyone went back to his or her house. And Dola and Babi were still good friends throughout the rest of their lives.





Akanke and the Jealous Pawnbroker




There once lived in a village an old man who had only one daughter named Akanke. This old man was so poor that all of his neighbours and friends believed that he was destined for poverty from birth. Although he was a hard-working man from his youth, as he grew older it was so that his poverty became more serious.

At last he became so entirely old and weary that he could not go and work on his farm for his living. Then his only daughter, Akanke, advised him to pawn her for money so that he might get money for his food. So without delay, but with great sorrow, this old man took Akanke to a pawnbroker who lived in another village, and he pawned Akanke for forty naira. Having got the money, this old man returned to his village with the money.

The pawnbroker was a middle-aged woman. She was very greedy and jealous, and she had only one son who was about twelve years old. She loved this her son so much that she indulged him in everything: she did not even allow him to do any work.

The work that Akanke was going to do for her was to grind corn until Akanke’s old father would be able to refund the forty naira for which she was pawned.

In the village of this pawnbroker there was a very large flat grinding stone, on which all the people of the village ground their corn, pepper, and many other things. None of the people of this village could tell how the strange stone came there. It was on the outskirts of the village, and it was by the side of the strange road which the goblins used to pass through to the place of their meetings in the night. Anyone who came there on the night of their meeting would be carried away by the goblins.

But as this pawnbroker was merciless, she forced poor Akanke to go and grind corn on the stone every night. She was not worried at all whether Akanke was carried away by the goblins. When it was the seventh day of the week, when everyone avoided the place of the stone, Akanke reminded her mistress, the jealous pawnbroker, ‘It is the night that the goblins will pass by the stone to get to the place of their meeting.’

The pawnbroker answered, shouting with great annoyance, ‘Akanke, you are a fool to remind me of the goblins’ meeting this night! Don’t you know that your old father has pawned you for money? Eh, Akanke, you must understand as from now that a pawned girl like you must work at any time in the day or night! Better you put the basket of corn on your head and go and grind it for me, or if you refuse to go to the stone this night, then better you go and tell your old father to pay my forty naira back at once!’

Willing or not, Akanke, with tears rolling down her cheeks, carried the corn to that strange grinding stone that night.

Akanke had hardly got to the stone when she knelt down before it and began to grind the corn as hastily as she could in fear, so that she might leave there before the goblins would come and pass through there to the place of meeting.

Akanke tried her best to grind all the corn so that she might leave there before the arrival of the goblins, but all her efforts were in vain. At last, a one-headed goblin who first arrived and met her there stopped and shouted horribly at Akanke: ‘Who are you, grinding corn on this stone in this night? Don’t you know that we goblins are having our meeting this night, and that we will pass through here to the place of our meeting?’

‘Yes, I am sure that you goblins will pass through here this night, and of course I reminded my mistress, the jealous pawnbroker, about it. But she forced me to come here,’ Akanke explained with fear, in a trembling voice.

‘Better you leave here now, I advise you,’ that one-headed goblin warned Akanke with a terrible noise, ‘because if the two-, three-, four-, five-, six- and seven-headed goblins, who are my masters, meet you here, they will carry you away. Leave now before it is too late for you!’ Then he passed through there to the place of their meeting.

But Akanke could not return to the pawnbroker without grinding all the corn.

A few minutes later, the master goblins arrived. They were two-, three-, four-, five-, six- and seven-headed goblins. The one with seven heads was their king. He stopped together with the rest in front of Akanke and shouted impatiently, ‘Who are you so brave as to come here to grind corn this night? Are you human or some other being?’

‘It was not my wish to come and grind corn here this night, but my mistress, who is a jealous pawnbroker and to whom I am pawned for money, has forced me to come here this night.’ Akanke was trembling from feet to head, with fear, as she explained this to the king of goblins, and tears were rolling down her cheeks.

Luckily, he listened to her attentively. He did not attempt to kill or take her away as he usually did. Instead he was sorry when he had heard her explanation. After he paused for a while, he told her to spread her head tie on the grinding stone. When she had done so with fear, he pulled out one of the seven horns which he wore on his seven heads. When he had put the horn on the head tie and recited some magic words on it, a strange cowrie came out from it, and it fell on to the head tie.

‘All right. Wrap up the cowrie with your head tie and take it to your old father, and put it in the room and leave it there for one night. He should go back to that room the following morning, and whatever he finds in the head tie when he unwraps it, it is his. And I am sure that you and your old father will be happy. But I warn you, don’t attempt to come to this stone at night again!’ In this way, the king of goblins had taken pity on the condition of Akanke and her father.

The king of goblins had hardly left there when Akanke, with great fear, wrapped up the cowrie with her head tie, and she then went in the darkness direct to her father. She and her old father put the head tie in the room as soon as she entered the house. After, she told him how the king of goblins had had mercy for her although she had ground corn on the stone in the night when the goblins passed through there on their way to their meeting.

It was to Akanke’s and her father’s greatest surprise that they entered the room the following morning. They did not believe their eyes at first when they met more than two thousand naira on the floor.

And that very morning, her father took above forty naira from that money. He and Akanke went to the jealous pawnbroker. He refunded her forty naira, for which Akanke was pawned, and in addition he gave her a few naira as a reward.

But the pawnbroker was so jealous when she saw a large sum of money in Akanke’s father’s hand that she refused the reward. She saw that although she had treated Akanke badly, the bad treatment had forced her to meet her good fortune.

‘Take your money away. I know how Akanke got it, and I shall send my own son to go and grind the corn on the same stone, and my son will get an even larger amount of money from the same king of goblins. Go back to your village now!’ the jealous pawnbroker spoke jealously, and she proudly frowned at Akanke and her old father. Then Akanke and her old father left for their village happily.

The jealous pawnbroker shrugged and said to herself as they left, ‘Who would accept such a little amount of money as a reward from them when I know where Akanke got it!’

The very next night that the goblins would pass by the stone to go to the place of their meeting, this jealous pawnbroker gave some quantity of corn to her son. She told him to go and grind it on the same stone.

As soon as he began to grind the corn, the king of goblins and his followers met the boy there. All of them stopped. ‘Who are you again?’ the king of goblins shouted with great passion. ‘Yes, it is high time enough to teach the people of this village a lesson. Last time,’ he continued with annoyance, ‘I met one lady here, and of course it was your mother, the pawnbroker, who sent her.

‘But this night I shall take you away to my house instead of giving you money, because your mother is disturbing us here too much,’ he shouted angrily at the boy.

Then he gripped the poor boy so suddenly that he shrank with fear to the size of a lizard. The king threw him in the big bag which was hung on his left shoulder, and he and his followers went direct to the place of their meeting.

After his mother, the jealous pawnbroker, had waited till the following morning but did not see him return, she went to the strange stone. But she found nothing there. She tried with all her effort to get her son back, but she failed.

Then she went to the soothsayer. The soothsayer disclosed to her, ‘Your son is still alive, but he is in the custody of a certain creature who is more powerful than a human being.’

‘What is the remedy now?’ the pawnbroker asked impatiently. ‘I mean, how can I get my son back from that creature?’

The soothsayer was without mercy. ‘If you want to get your son back, you will sacrifice four goats, four fowls, four bottles of palm oil, and a large sum of money to the Iroko tree, to the god of iron, to the god of thunder, and to the god of rivers,’ he said.

‘But my money will not be sufficient to buy all those things!’ the pawnbroker said, weeping bitterly. ‘What shall I do then, good soothsayer?’

‘I am sorry, indeed,’ the soothsayer said, deceiving the jealous pawnbroker, ‘but just to help you, I say go and bring all of the money that you have got at home.’

Then the pawnbroker ran to her house and brought all the money she had to the soothsayer. He took it all from her, but her only son still could not be found. Thus the jealous pawnbroker lost both her son and money as a result of her greediness and jealousy.





Remember the Day After Tomorrow




‘Remember the day after tomorrow, my sons.’ That was how the father used to warn his two sons, Dele and Deji, whenever they offended one who was older than them. The father, mother, and their two sons, Dele and Deji, who, in the days gone by, lived in a remote village, were poor, but the father was not poor in the civilities which surround human life. In the night, when the day’s work was over, and as soon as all of them sat before the fire, the old father would start to lecture his sons on how to respect their elders so that they might live longer, to make their lives happy and worth living among the people of the village.

‘Perhaps,’ Dele suggested one day to his younger brother, Deji, ‘“Remember the day after tomorrow” is the name of our eldest brother who was born and left our father and mother for a big town before we were born.’

‘And probably our father is just reminding us not to forget him,’ Deji said, supporting his brother, Dele, because both of them were puzzled about this warning. And it was a pity that they did not understand what their old and weary father meant by that. But alas! Dele and Deji did not ask their father to tell them the meaning of the warning, but instead both convinced themselves that ‘Remember the day after tomorrow’ was the name of their eldest brother who had left their village for a big town before they were born.

Unfortunately, a few years after their father had started to warn them like that, he died suddenly, and two months later their mother died as well. Then the two young boys began to take care of themselves, but not as satisfactorily as when their father and mother were alive.

Dele and Deji each had a very big hunch on his back, as had their father, mother, and the rest of the family. So for their strange hunchbacks, other people in the village always called them ‘the Hunchback Family’.

A year after their father and mother died, a strange, hefty man came to them, in their father’s house. The name of the man was Totofioko. He was tall, cheerful and talkative, and always wore smart clothes. However, he was an expert trickster and kidnapper of children. He lived in the village which was next to Dele and Deji’s village. He was very well known throughout his village and many other villages as well for his tricks.

Totofioko had overheard when the father of the two boys warned them, ‘Remember the day after tomorrow,’ and noticed as well that every one in the family had a hunch on the back. So one day he put a flat stone on his back in such a perfect way that the stone seemed exactly like a big hunch when he wore a garment over it. Having done so, he took a big suitcase and one expensive umbrella and then he went to Dele and Deji in their dead father’s house. He met them as they sat in their sitting room.

‘Hello, my dear two junior brothers!’ Totofioko said as he walked into the sitting room with a smiling face and put the umbrella and the big suitcase down. ‘Hello, sir! Welcome, sir! Please have a seat, sir!’ Dele and Deji said as they received Totofioko with a bit of a shock, especially when they saw the costly garments which he wore and the costly suitcase and the umbrella in his hand.

‘Thank you very much, my dear junior brothers! I am very sorry to tell you now that this is the first time I have ever come home since when both of you were born,’ Totofioko quickly explained to the boys as he was sitting down on the seat.

‘This is the cold water, sir,’ Deji said as he ran to the pot and brought cold water in an earthen bowl. He knelt down with due respect as he gave Totofioko the water.

When he had drunk from the water and rested for a few seconds, Totofioko asked the boys, with a quiet voice, as if he had not yet heard of the death of Dele and Deji’s father and mother, ‘Has your father gone to the farm?’

‘Father? Our father died over a year ago,’ Dele and Deji exclaimed at the same time with sorrow.

‘Is it true that my father, or our father of the whole family, has died? Please tell me the truth!’ Totofioko said, pretending to care.

‘Certainly, our father died long ago.’ Dele and Deji, who were still greenhorns, confirmed the death of their father loudly.

‘My father is dead?’ Totofioko raised his head up and hesitated for a few seconds and then dropped his head down. ‘Could the two of you remember that our father used to warn you always before he died that you must not forget – “Remember the day after tomorrow”?’ Totofioko asked the boys with a deceitful grief.

‘Oh, yes, you are right. Our father used to warn us always before his death that we must remember “Remember the day after tomorrow”, and he told us also that “Remember the day after tomorrow” would come home soon,’ Dele explained hastily.

‘Was that so? Good!’ Totofioko paused for a few seconds as he started to raise his head up and down in a slow motion as if he was thinking seriously about the boys’ father’s death.

‘Now, I confess to both of you that I am your eldest brother, whose name your father, before his death, had been mentioning to you often. And my name is “Remember the day after tomorrow,” and I am thus before you today,’ Totofioko said, and then he stood up. He posed himself before them for a few seconds and then sat back down. ‘I was born and went to a big town before both of you were born. So, both of you are my junior brothers because your father was my father as well. And I am coming to stay with you as from today, and I shall be taking great care of you as well as our father did before he died. Now, to be sure that I am your eldest brother, the firstborn of our father, look at my hunchback, and how it resembles those of your own. But of course it is bigger than your own, and that must be so, because I am older than you!’ Totofioko stood up; he showed the boys his false hunchback, and then he sat down again. Thus he, with his trick, persuaded the two boys in such a cunning way that they accepted at once that he was their eldest brother.

Saying, ‘Hah, this is our eldest brother whose name is “Remember the day after tomorrow”,’ Dele and Deji embraced Totofioko with gladness.

‘By the way, where is your mother, who is my mother as well?’ Totofioko, now their deceptive brother, asked loudly with his usual trick.

‘Oh, she died just a few months after our father died,’ the two boys replied with sorrow.

‘Hoo-hoo-hoo!’ Totofioko, having heard this, covered his head with both palms and wept for some minutes just to deceive the boys.

‘Hah! Stop weeping, brother. What are you doing that for? Stop it, sir!’ Dele and Deji stood up and caressed Totofioko until he stopped his false weeping. Then hardly had he stopped weeping when he stood up. He walked up and down in the house. He peeped into every room just to know the kind of property that was inside it.

‘I am glad. All the property in the rooms is precious enough and I will carry it back to my village,’ Totofioko thought in his mind before he came back to the sitting room while Dele and Deji were busy cooking food. And he and the boys ate together.

Some days after Totofioko had begun living with Dele and Deji, he told them one morning. ‘Yes, now, both of you are aware already that only the eldest person in the family has the right to be in charge of all the property of his deceased father or mother. Therefore, I wish you to gather all of our father’s and mother’s property together and bring it all to me. But instead of sharing these things now, I shall put all inside one of the rooms. Then I shall lock up the room and keep the key for myself.’

‘Indeed, you are the right person to do so, sir!’ Dele and Deji exclaimed with gladness. For, in fact, it is the eldest person in the family who has the right to be in charge of the property of his or her deceased. But in this case Totofioko was not the right person to be in charge of Dele and Deji’s father’s and mother’s property. Of course, these two boys did not realize that Totofioko was not their eldest brother and was not related to them in any way.

So they gathered all of their father’s and mother’s property together. They brought all to Totofioko, and he put it all inside one of the rooms, and he kept the key in his pocket.

In the mid-night, when Totofioko saw that the two boys slept deeply, he opened the door of that room. He carried all the property to his village, and he returned before daybreak. So the boys never knew that their inherited property had gone to Totofioko’s village.

Having spent a few days more with Dele and Deji, Totofioko advised them, ‘As I see, things are not moving fast in this our village. So, I shall take you to the big town from which I have recently come. You will be working there and earning a large sum of money. And, I believe, in one year’s time, each of you will surely become a rich man. Out of your earnings, you will marry beautiful ladies and after that you will come back to this village.’

‘Many thanks, brother, for your useful advice. But who will take care of our property after we have left our house?’ Dele and Deji asked doubtfully.

‘Never mind about the property, my junior brothers. And you should not be afraid. There is not any thief who can break into our house and steal our property. Look at this juju-leaf. It is a strong charm which has the power to scare away thieves, and I am going to hang it on the main door now.’ Totofioko showed Dele and Deji an empty leaf, and then he stood up; he went to the main door, and he hung the leaf there.

Then at four o’clock in the morning, before the people of the village had woken up, Totofioko, with his usual tricks, took Dele and Deji to his village. He hardly had entered his house when he pulled down the flat stone which he had put on his back, and which he had used to deceive the boys that he had a hunch like them. Now the boys knew that it was a flat stone Totofioko put on his back and not a hunch. And in their presence, he sold all their father’s and mother’s property to an auctioneer.

‘Oh! This is our inherited property! Don’t sell these things!’ Dele and Deji shouted unhappily when it was revealed to them now that Totofioko had carried their inherited property to his village and that he was selling it all.

‘Shut your mouths there! Or don’t you know who you are talking to?’ Totofioko boomed on the boys and then struck their mouths with a stick.

‘Brother, don’t be harsh to us this time. For you have confessed to us that you are our eldest brother whose name is “Remember the day after tomorrow”,’ Dele bravely reminded Totofioko.

‘Who is your eldest brother? Tell me now! I say, tell me!’ Totofioko shouted loudly with a fearful voice. But Dele and Deji became dumb with fear. They could not speak out.

‘I am afraid that things have changed now!’ Deji whispered to Dele.

Dele nodded and whispered back to Deji, ‘I believe this man is a kidnapper of children and not our eldest brother or relative. This is not “Remember the day after tomorrow” at all.’

The following morning, and without giving food to the boys, Totofioko sold them to a slave dealer who lived in the next village. One morning, as Dele and Deji were working on the farm of their buyer, Totofioko, who had dressed in a costly garment, came up to them.

Proudly, he explained to them. ‘Yes, there you are now. I am sorry that it is too late for you to understand that “Remember the day after tomorrow” is not the name of a person, but it is a warning for the future. And it would have been better if you had asked the meaning of it from your father before he died. Then there could be no deceiver like me who would deceive you like this. And it is a good practice for a young boy who does not understand the meaning of either a warning, proverb, or twisted words, to ask for the full meaning and understand it thoroughly before it is too late! Goodbye, boys!’ Totofioko then hastily went away, as both boys were weeping bitterly.





Ade, the Traitor




A long time ago, Adisa and Ade were close friends. Adisa was faithful to Ade in everything that they did. But Ade was unfaithful to Adisa in all respects, but of course this was not revealed to Adisa.

At that time, there was a king who reigned in their town. This king was very cruel to all offenders. He reserved a bush in which all offenders were killed. The bush was at a distance of about two kilometres from the town. It was a terrible bush indeed to all offenders, and in it was a fearful bird who lived in a stream in the bush and had the voice of a human being.

One day Ade, the unfaithful friend, offended the king. The offence was quite simple enough for another king to have forgiven. Although Ade asked for pardon, this king refused entirely, for he had never pardoned an offender in his life.

There was a tree at the front of the palace to which every offender was tied until the day arrived he would be killed. This tree was in the open place, so that all the people of the town might come there and pay their last visits to any offender tied up.

Ade was tied to this tree, and all the people of the town came to pay him their last visits, until the very day was reached on which he would be killed. Every one of these people was thankful to the king for sentencing Ade to death, because he had been unfaithful and betrayed most of them. But Adisa, the faithful friend, was trying his best to see that Ade was released by the king. Yet all his efforts failed, for the king did not listen to his plea at all, so Adisa was distressed.

When Ade was taken to that dreadful bush by the king’s killers, Adisa followed them. And in his presence, Ade was beaten to death with heavy clubs of iron, as that was the order that the king had given to the killers.

As Adisa was faithful to Ade, he did not follow the killers back to the town. Instead, he sat near the dead body of his friend Ade, which lay on the ground.

He stayed there, and he was driving away all the flies which were flying round the dead body of Ade, and he was weeping bitterly. His intention was to remain with the dead body until he too would be killed either by a wild animal or a spirit. And Adisa was still weeping loudly when a creature came to him from an unknown place. This strange creature had the voice of a human being and his appearance was that of the dreadful bird that lived in the bush. He was a human-dead-body-eating strange creature.

Immediately upon coming, the strange creature shouted horribly at Adisa, ‘Eh, leave this place now! I want to eat this dead body; it is my food!’

‘Please,’ Adisa begged, ‘spare this dead body for me.’ He then explained, ‘It was my friend, and he was the man that I loved most in this world, before he was killed on this spot.’

‘Do you believe that he was faithful to you before he was killed here?’ the strange creature asked quietly.

‘Indeed, he was,’ Adisa confirmed with sorrow.

‘Are you sure he will not betray you to death in the near future?’ the strange creature inquired as he stared at Adisa.

‘I believe he will not,’ Adisa confirmed with assurance.

‘All right,’ the strange creature replied calmly, along with a shrug of the shoulders. ‘If you are certain that he was faithful to you before he was killed, and that he will not betray you in the near future, then take this small gourd, remove its cork, and then put some of the magic powder which is inside on to your friend’s eyes, and he will come alive at once. But take care that your friend does not know the use of the juju-gourd and the juju-powder.’ The small gourd which he gave to Adisa was vomited from his huge stomach.

Then the strange creature hinted at all that would happen to Adisa in the future, saying, ‘I do not believe you at all, that this your friend was faithful to you. And as you do not allow me to eat his dead body now, it will be revealed to you soon that he is not faithful to you. Perhaps he may even be the one who will cause your death at last.’ Then he disappeared into the bush.

Adisa was distressed when the creature disappeared suddenly because he could not decide whether the creature was a spirit or not. He did not know that he was the dead-body-eating creature, the terrible bird who had the voice which was similar to that of a human being, and who lived in the river which was in that bush. And, of course, Adisa did not know that it had been his weeping that called him out from the bottom of the river.

However, Adisa removed the cork from the gourd and put some of the juju-powder which was inside it on to both eyes of his dead friend. And to Adisa’s greatest surprise, Ade woke from death immediately as if nothing had happened to him. Then Adisa, at once, corked the gourd and threw it into his pocket so that Ade might not see it, because the strange creature had warned him not to let Ade see it or know the use of it. Then both of them returned to their houses with happiness.

Adisa hung the juju-gourd on the rack as soon as he entered his room. Then, as from that day, if a person died in the town, Adisa would be invited to wake him or her, and he would take a large sum of money as his reward. Very soon Adisa was well known to all people and to the king of his town, as he who had the juju-gourd which could wake the dead.

And he was so faithful that he always gave a half of any money that he received to his unfaithful friend, Ade. But Ade could not be satisfied with that. Ade worried Adisa every day to teach him how to use the juju-powder which was inside the gourd, but Adisa did not teach him.

But Ade was so unfaithful to Adisa that, one day, when Adisa went to another town, just to return in a few days’ time, Ade entered his room. He took the juju-gourd from the rack and he hung in its place an inferior one. After that, he took the superior one to the large river and he threw it into the water. And it fell into the hand of the very same strange creature who had given it to Adisa. Instantly he swallowed it, and then he waited for the day when he would ask Adisa to give it back to him.

As soon as Ade had thrown the juju-gourd into the river, he went to the same king who had condemned him to death before Adisa woke him. He said, ‘Your majesty, the king, I bring secret news to you. Adisa, my friend, who woke me when you condemned me to death last time, has told me that, whenever any member of your family dies, he will not wake him or her. This will be his revenge on you for condemning me to death.’

And the king kept this bad news in his mind from that day. But of course Adisa had not told Ade such a thing at all. Ade was just trying to convince the king he should kill Adisa – all because Adisa did not teach Ade how to use the juju-powder inside the juju-gourd.

A few days later, after Adisa had returned from his journey, one of the king’s family died suddenly. Ade did not show in his behaviour that he had betrayed Adisa out of his juju-gourd, and Adisa himself was not aware that his juju-gourd had been thrown in the river, and an inferior one hung in its place. The king sent for Adisa. He implored him to help him wake his dead man. Without a word, Adisa returned to his house. He took that inferior gourd, which he supposed to be his own, and returned to the king. He removed the cork, so as to put juju-powder on the eyes of the dead body. To his dismay, it was sand that came out of it.

In short, Adisa failed to wake the dead man. Then, in the presence of the king, Ade said, ‘Adisa, you have done as you told me you would, that one day you would take revenge on the king because he condemned me to death some time ago!’

Adisa stared at Ade in shock. ‘Ade, when did I tell you that I would not wake the king’s man if such a man should die?’

‘Ho-o-o!’ Ade shouted. ‘Because both of us are now before the king, you now deny all you planned to do to the king! But if you did not plan to take revenge on the king, please, just wake the dead man now!’

Now the king was convinced of the truth of the lies which Ade told him. Without hesitation, the king ordered his killers to take Adisa to the bush and beat him to death at once.

Ade followed the killers to the bush, and he and the killers beat Adisa to death before they went back to the town. Thus Ade, the unfaithful friend, betrayed Adisa, his faithful friend, to death at last.

A few minutes after Adisa was beaten to death, the strange creature who had given him the juju-gourd came there. He woke Adisa and asked him thus: ‘Where is your friend, Ade, today? And where is my juju-gourd, which I gave to you the day you woke Ade from death?’

‘He is not here.’ Ade wiped his face with both palms, and then he explained with great sorrow, ‘He was the very one who caused my death. And he joined hands with the killers, and they beat me to death.’

‘Did you not tell me on that day, that Ade was faithful to you, and was it not for that you begged me to spare him for you?’ The strange creature spoke with a horrible voice.

With a tired voice, Adisa replied. ‘Certainly, I did.’

‘Now, since you did not allow me to eat the dead body of Ade the other day, today I shall eat you, instead!’ Then he killed Adisa again and ate his body. When he had finished the body, he went away.

Of course, Adisa saved his friend, Ade, from death, but Ade betrayed him to death in return.





Rere, the Disobedient Son




Long ago, an old man and his wife lived in a village. The old man’s name was Oluwo. He had three sons and the name of the youngest was Rere. Rere was barely twelve years old when one morning he told his father that the work which he preferred to do was hunting. But his father tried his best to persuade him not to go hunting. And, Rere’s father being rich, he told him that he would give him anything which he demanded from him if he chose another profession. But Rere would not change his mind.

‘I prefer the hunting profession to all other professions that are on earth,’ Rere insisted.

But Rere’s father loved him so much that – instead of allowing the boy to go and hunt in the bush, for Oluwo feared the wild beasts would kill him – he went to the market. There he bought a gun, plenty of gun-powder and gun-shot, and he also bought many rams and goats. He tied the animals to the trees which were at the back of his house. Then he gave the gun, gun-powder and the gun-shot to Rere, and he told him to practise shooting at the rams and goats.

Yet Rere rejected his father’s advice. He insisted he would go and hunt in the bush and jungle instead. So Oluwu left him to himself.

One morning, Rere took his gun, gun-powder, gun-shot and machete. He went to a faraway jungle without telling his father and mother. When he got to the heart of the jungle, he started to roam about looking for animals. Unfortunately, he did not see any animal before the rain came. The rain was so heavy that it forced Rere to enter into a large hole of a big tree and he hid himself there.

When the rain did not stop till the night was approaching. Rere came out from the hole of that tree. He started to go home in the heavy rain. But he did not track far before he reached a stream. And as soon as he had crossed the stream to half-way, the torrent started to carry him away suddenly. Rere struggled hard to free himself from the torrent, but all his efforts failed.

His luck was that the torrent did not carry him far when Tortoise, the Jungle Drummer, saw him as the torrent was rolling him away. Without hesitation he jumped into the stream; he held Rere and pulled him to the bank. Having given him first aid and noticed that he was conscious, he took him to his house which was near the stream. He gave him food, and after the boy had rested for some minutes. Tortoise, the Jungle Drummer, asked, ‘Why were you so careless as to enter the stream which had a strong torrent like that?’

‘It was the night which was near that forced me to enter the stream, though I saw that it rushed strongly. I did not want to sleep in the jungle,’ Rere explained to the Jungle Drummer.

‘But what did you come to do in this jungle which is full of wild beasts, a small boy like you?’ the Jungle Drummer asked with wonder.

‘I came to hunt in this jungle,’ replied Rere, dejected.

‘Have you not been advised by your father not to come and hunt in the jungle?’ the Jungle Drummer asked calmly.

‘Of course, my father warned me not to come,’ Rere explained clearly. ‘He even bought many rams and goats for me just to practise hunting at, instead of going to hunt in the jungle or bush. But I did not know at that time that he was saving me from harm. And at last, when he noticed that I did not pay heed to his advice, he left me to myself.’

Then, when Tortoise, the Jungle Drummer, asked more questions of Rere, the boy put all his father’s advice into song and he sang it to Tortoise:

Rere, the son of Oluwo.

My father bought animals.

He told me to learn shooting at them, but I refused.

I said, it is in the bush and jungle of buffalo and elephant that I will go and practise hunting.

And when the torrent took me, I became Tortoise’s slave.





When Rere sang like that with a lovely voice, Tortoise, the Jungle Drummer, was so impressed by the song that he stood up suddenly and danced up and down happily for some minutes. ‘Oh, yes, this boy is a very good singer. He has a good and lovely voice. Now I will not allow him to leave me, but I shall be adding his lovely song and voice to my playing whenever people invite me to come and play my drum for them.’ Tortoise, the Jungle Drummer, thought this to himself.

Fortunately for the Jungle Drummer, at the time he rescued Rere from the stream and took him to his house, it remained only twelve days to the time when the king of Tortoise’s town would give sacrifice to his head. And Tortoise, the Jungle Drummer, was one of the drummers that the king had invited to come and beat their drums at the big ceremony connected with the sacrifice.

So, before the day was reached, Tortoise carved a big tree into a huge drum with many small holes around its body. The drum was so light that a person could hold it up easily with one hand, and it was so roomy that it easily accommodated such a small boy as Rere.

When Tortoise, the Jungle Drummer, had completed the drum, just to test it, he put Rere in it and sealed both ends with strong leather of antelope. Then he told Rere to sing his usual song.

As Rere started to sing his song, and the Jungle Drummer or Tortoise started to beat the drum to the song, both were so lovely and fascinating that those who were near there started to dance here and there until they were exhausted.

Having tested the drum and Rere’s song, and seeing that both were extremely fascinating, Tortoise believed that the other drummers could not beat him. As soon as Rere came out from the drum, Tortoise ran to the king and boasted before him, ‘Your worship, the king. I, Tortoise, the Jungle Drummer, shall beat my wonderful drum and sing an enchanting song in an impressive way, so that you will stand up from your seat and dance with great joy on the day and in the night that you are sacrificing to your head, though people have not seen you dancing before.’

‘You, Tortoise, the Jungle Drummer? But how will your drum and song be so impressive and fascinating that they will make me dance? How many times have you seen me dancing since I have become king? Eh, tell me, Tortoise, the Jungle Drummer?’

‘I assure you, king, you will stand up and dance merrily on the day you are sacrificing to your head,’ the Jungle Drummer confirmed to the king.

‘If it happens as you are telling me now, I promise I shall divide my slaves, my pawned men, and all my other property into two parts, and I shall give you one part of them,’ the king promised, though he did not believe Tortoise, the Jungle Drummer.

Tortoise left the palace as soon as he had promised the king all that he would do on the day that the king was to make sacrifice to his head. So he and Rere began to prepare for the big day.

When the day was reached, Tortoise, the Jungle Drummer, gave sufficient food to Rere. After the boy had eaten to his entire satisfaction, the Jungle Drummer told him to creep into the huge drum. Then he sealed both ends of the drum with the fine leather of antelope. Having done that, he put the drum on his head and then he carried it to the assembly ground where the celebrations of the sacrifice to the king’s head would take place. Although several other drummers preceded Tortoise, the Jungle Drummer, and all were set with their drums ready for beating, he did not waste time but he hastily set his own drum down near their own.

After a while, the king, his lieutenants, chiefs and bearers arrived on the assembly ground. They walked in procession into the pavilion which was mainly erected for the king. After the chiefs had performed the sacrifice for the king’s head, in which many cows and rams were included, beating of drums, singing, dancing, and flattering started. But Tortoise did not beat his drum this time. He kept calm and was just looking at the other drummers.

Although the other drummers played and sang well, neither the beating of their drums nor their singing various kinds of songs impressed the king, his lieutenants, chiefs and bearers enough to stand up and dance.

But as soon as the Jungle Drummer, Tortoise, struck the side of his drum three times, which was the sign for Rere to start singing, and Rere started to sing with his usual impressive and enchanting voice, and Tortoise started to beat his drum to Rere’s enchanting song, then the king, his lieutenants, his chiefs, his bearers and the multitude of people rushed to the centre of the assembly ground. All started to dance here and there merrily as if they were intoxicated by hot drink. The king and his people were so impressed by the enchanting song being sung inside the drum by Rere that they danced merrily till midnight.

When all were tired and had stopped dancing, the king, according to his promise to Tortoise, the Jungle Drummer, divided his slaves, his pawned men, and all the other property into two parts. He gave one part to the Jungle Drummer, Tortoise. Then the king went back to his palace while other people went back to their houses in happiness.

Of course the king and his people were not aware that it was a person, Rere, who sang the enchanting songs inside Tortoise’s drum for them. Thus Tortoise, the Jungle Drummer, surpassed all other drummers, those who returned to their houses with shame, while Tortoise returned to his house with honour.

Meanwhile, Rere’s mother and father, Oluwo, had started to look for him from the day he went to the jungle and they did not know his whereabouts. They did not know that Tortoise, the Jungle Drummer, had rescued him from the torrent of the stream and had detained him in his house and was using his enchanting songs in the drum.

So, after Oluwo had tried his best to find Rere’s whereabouts but failed, he consulted the wise man, who explained to him: ‘Certainly, you will find your son, Rere, if you can sacrifice the used or old leather of a drum, and with it the small bells which are attached to the edges of the drum, to the god of the river.

‘After that,’ the wise man continued, ‘you will prepare an important feast to which you will invite several people. You will invite Tortoise, the Jungle Drummer, as well, to come and beat and sing at the feast. Surely, that is the day you will find your son, Rere. But be sure that you supply plenty of hot drinks in the feast.’ Thus the wise man advised Rere’s father, who then went away and made the sacrifice to the god of the river as directed by the wise man.

Then a few days later, Oluwo prepared a very rich feast, and, in addition, he bought plenty of the hot drinks. Afterwards, he invited several people and also Tortoise, the Jungle Drummer.

Then, after the guests had eaten and drunk, Tortoise was to beat his drum. He was too greedy, and he was drunk to excess before he started to beat his drum. But still, as soon as he started to beat his drum, and Rere started to sing his enchanting song, all the guests, and Rere’s father and mother did not resist when they stood up and started to dance merrily.

But when they had danced for about one hour, Rere’s father and mother stopped dancing suddenly. When they stood still and listened carefully for some minutes, they were shocked with horror the moment they identified the voice of their son, Rere, who was singing a kind of song in which he was mentioning his father’s name, Oluwo, over and over again. And the song was coming out of Tortoise’s drum.

Now Rere’s father and mother were impatient to see their son. What to do to get their son back from the Jungle Drummer, Tortoise, was a big problem for them. If they told Tortoise openly that their son was inside the drum, he might run away with him. However, after a while, a thought came to Oluwo’s mind. He stopped Tortoise suddenly from beating his drum. After that, he invited him to a small room in his house.

As soon as he had given Tortoise a seat, he started to serve him and flatter him continuously. And as Tortoise was greedy in everything, he drank so much that he became unconscious within a few minutes. As soon as he fell down from the seat and fell asleep, Oluwo went and loosened the leather of the drum and then pulled out his son, Rere, who was nearly suffocated by the heat. Then Oluwo sealed the drum back with the same leather that he had removed from it. He did the seal so carefully that the drum seemed as if its leather had not been removed at all. Then he replaced the drum behind Tortoise.

Then he rushed his son, Rere, to an open place where there was fresh air to breathe in.

All Oluwo’s guests had gone away before Tortoise woke up in the mid-night. As soon as Tortoise, the Jungle Drummer, lifted up his drum and felt that it was lighter than when Rere was inside it, he knew that Rere had come out of it.

‘Who has tampered with my drum?’ Tortoise started to shout angrily. But when Rere’s father heard the noise, he beat Tortoise with a club mercilessly, and then drove him away from the house.

After Rere had become conscious and had eaten, his father asked, ‘Rere, will you go and hunt in the jungle again?’

‘Never shall I go and hunt in any jungle any more, not until I am old enough!’ Rere replied with regret.





The Duckling Brothers and their Disobedient Sister




Once there lived an old man and his wife. They had two sons, named Ajala and Adele. Ajala was older than Adele. Their father and mother were so poor that they could not live without borrowing money from the inhabitants of their village. They were also buying their clothes on credit.

One day, when the father failed to pay some of their debts, the creditor acted very rudely to him. Having seen this, Ajala was so ashamed that, the following morning, he invited his younger brother, Adele, to one corner of their house, and told him, ‘Adele, you see, we are old enough to go abroad to find a kind of job to do. When we work there for some years and we save some amount of money, then we shall come back to our father and mother and give them the money. And when they pay their debts from the money, they will be free from their debts.’ This was Ajala’s advice to Adele.

Without argument, Adele agreed to his brother’s advice. Then the following morning, both of them told their father and mother that they were going abroad for a job, and they all bade each other goodbye. Thus Ajala and Adele left their village for an unknown place.

A very long, long time after they had left their village they came to an endless jungle. Having travelled in the jungle for nine days, they came to its middle.

Ajala and Adele were tired and wearied before they reached there. They stopped their journey, and they sat down in order to rest on that spot for some hours. But as they started to discuss the food that they would eat, a fearful old woman appeared before them unexpectedly.

Ajala and Adele were so afraid of the strange old woman that they were unable to stand up and run away for their lives because they thought that she came there to kill them.

‘What have both of you come to do in my land, or don’t you know that this is my land?’ the old woman shouted horribly at them.

Ajala, the senior brother, hastily apologized with a dead voice: ‘We are sorry that we have come to your land. But we shall be happy if you will spare us a few minutes to explain to you what we were looking for before we came to your land.’

‘Yes, I am pleased to listen to your explanation, boys,’ the strange old woman confirmed loudly.

‘Thank you, mother. You see, our father and mother are so poor that they buy almost everything on credit. They owe so much money that they cannot go out in the day, but only at night. But to help them pay their debts, both of us have resolved to go abroad to look for a job there. When we work hard and save a large sum of money, then we shall go back to our father and mother, and then we shall help them pay all their debts,’ Ajala explained to the strange old woman.

‘Is that so?’ she bent forward and asked with wonder.

‘It is so, mother,’ Adele, the younger brother, confirmed loudly.

‘Well, if both of you can keep to my law, you will leave this my land with much money and happiness,’ the old woman assured Ajala and Adele.

‘We shall keep your law, mother,’ Ajala and Adele promised.

‘All right. If you are sure to do so, stand up and follow me now.’ So without hesitation they stood up and they followed her. After a while, they trekked to a big farm which was full of kola-nut trees. She took them round the farm and showed them the kola-nuts.

‘I put both of you in charge of these my kola-nut trees as from today. Whatever kola-nuts the trees bear are for you. If you wish, you may carry the nuts to the market which is near this my jungle. Any amount you sell them for is yours. But be sure that you keep all the money so that you may have a large sum of money to give to your father and mother when you return to them perhaps in six months’ time.’ Thus the old woman explained to them as if she really wanted to help them.

After that, she took the young boys, Ajala and Adele, to a small hut which was in the centre of this farm. She told them to live in it. She also showed them one strange spot. On this strange spot, there was a big deep and wide pit, and it was covered with a broken pot. Inside this covered pit, there were two duck’s eggs, but Ajala and Adele did not know what was inside the pit.

Having shown them the covered pit, she warned them seriously, ‘Whatever happens to you, you must not attempt to remove the cover of this pit in order to see what may be inside it. If you dare remove the cover and see what may be inside the pit, it means you break my law. And breaking my law means you disobey me, and this can transform you into a horrible thing.’ Having thus warned Adele and Ajala, she disappeared unexpectedly.

So Ajala and Adele lived in that hut. They plucked the kola-nuts and carried them to the nearest market, selling them, and keeping the money in a small hole which they dug in a corner of the hut. And they were so very careful to keep to the old woman’s law that they did not go near the pit or remove its cover.

When Ajala and Adele had spent three years on the farm and they had saved enough money, they decided with each other that soon they would leave there and return to their father and mother.

Unfortunately, just a few days before the period when they decided to leave, their youngest sister, who was born after they had just left their village, and who had heard that she had two brothers but who both had gone abroad, started to look for them. Thus she was going from one village to another looking for them until she came to this jungle. She was lucky to meet Ajala and Adele, her brothers, in their hut one morning not long before they planned to leave.

Bukola, for that was her name, greeted them with due respect. Although they responded nicely, they could not recognize her as their sister. But when she explained herself to them, that she was born a few months after they had left the village, they received her with gladness. Then she told them the condition of their father and mother, that it was far worse than before, when Ajala and Adele had not left them. And they told her how the old woman received them with kindness and how they had saved a large sum of money. Then they showed her the covered pit and warned her not to attempt to remove its cover in order to see what was inside it. And she told them that she would not.

But one morning, after Ajala and Adele had taken their kola-nuts to the market, Bukola, their disobedient sister, went to the pit. She remarked to herself, ‘What kind of thing will be in this pit which a person must not see? Today, I will remove the cover to see what is in it.’

To Bukola’s surprise, when she removed the cover of the pit, she saw that there were two duck’s eggs. She took both out at once. But immediately the eggs struck each other. They hatched and two ducklings came out. Then with fear she took them and walked back to the spot where she had been sitting in the hut. She sat down while the two ducklings were in front of her, and then she waited for the return of her two brothers to show them the ducklings.

She waited and waited till nightfall, but they did not return to the hut from the market. She took both ducklings; she walked to one corner of the hut; she sat down and started to weep bitterly. All this time she did not know it was her two brothers who had turned into those ducklings.

As she continued to weep, while the two ducklings were in front of her, the old woman who had permitted her brothers to be in charge of her farm and sell her kola-nuts for their own benefit, appeared before Bukola. It was so dark that she could see the old woman only faintly in the darkness.

‘What are you weeping for?’ the old woman asked.

‘I am weeping for my two brothers who have not returned from the market since morning!’ said Bukola with tears.

‘Yes,’ the old woman explained to Bukola, ‘your brothers cannot return to you any more because they have turned into these two ducklings which are in front of you now. Your brothers have turned into ducklings because you opened the pit and took out the two duck’s eggs, which later hatched into ducklings. But of course, I had warned your brothers not even to attempt to open the pit.’

Then Bukola knelt down and begged the old woman to change her brothers from ducklings back to persons. But the old woman advised her, ‘No! Unless you can pretend to be a dumb girl from this moment for the period of seven years! Which means you must not talk or make a single noise whatsoever happens to you throughout that period. Then at the end of the seventh year your two brothers will change from ducklings into their usual form as persons.’

Having advised Bukola like that, the old woman began to search every corner of the hut for the money which Ajala and Adele had realized from the kola-nuts. After a while, she found one of the four holes in which the two boys kept their money. Without mercy, she took all the money that she met in the hole. Then she walked zigzag back to Bukola who had by then pretended to be dumb. The old woman threatened the girl so perhaps she would talk or make a noise, but when she did not even make a noise, but was like a real dumb person, the old woman disappeared with the money.

The old woman was not an ordinary woman but a strong witch of this jungle. She would always take the money of those who lived in her farm or jungle after she had turned them into ducklings. At first she would pretend to be kind to those who had trespassed on her farm or jungle, and she would permit them to pluck her kola-nuts and sell them and keep the money they would realize for their own use. But as soon as she had turned them into ducklings, she would search for their money and then take all away for her own use.

This old woman or witch had designed this means in order to get money for her living because she had become so old and wearied that she had no longer had power to pluck her kola-nuts and maintain the farm by herself.

Then, now that Bukola was pretending to be a dumb girl, a prince who was hunting for animals in that farm or jungle saw her in the hut. ‘What are you doing here?’ the prince asked with wonder, ‘You, a very beautiful girl. What is your name? Where have you come from to this hut?’

But Bukola would not reply at all. She was just breathing in and out and looking on like a real dumb girl, with her eyes which showed she was in great sorrow.

‘Are you a dumb girl? If you are so or not, I am taking you to my town to be my wife.’ Having asked a number of questions from Bukola to which she did not reply, the prince thought that she was dumb. Then he simply took her, and her two ducklings, on the back of his horse and then rode to his town.

But when his royal family spoke to Bukola and she did not reply, they believed that she was really dumb. And as it was against the tradition of this town for their prince to marry a dumb lady as his wife, all the royal family advised their prince strongly not to marry Bukola. The reason that the royal family of the town objected to their prince marrying a dumb girl or lady was that they did not wish the son of a dumb woman to rule their town whenever he became king.

At last, when their prince rejected his family’s advice and married Bukola, the royal family gathered together and they decided secretly that whenever Bukola bore either a male or female baby, they would kill it on the day of its naming ceremony. The prince was not aware of this evil plan, but Bukola, who was with them, heard their plan, but still pretended to be dumb.

A few months later, Bukola was delivered of a male child, and, in accord with the royal family’s evil plan, they killed the child on the very day that the name was given to it. And this evil deed was done in the presence of Bukola, for they had confirmed to themselves that she was dumb. However, she was so shocked that she was about to speak out that she was not dumb when she saw that her child was being strangled to death. But she controlled her mouth, for otherwise her two brothers who had been turned into ducklings would not ever change to persons again.

And so it was that the royal family killed all her newly born children.

But of course, as God was so good, when Bukola was being delivered of her fourth child, the end of the seventh year was near. Indeed, it was to be on that very day that her child would be named and then killed, that the end of the seventh year, when she would be free to talk, would be reached. So it was that after the name was given to her child, and the royal family prepared to strangle the child to death, at that moment she hastily spoke to the royal family: ‘Please don’t strangle my child to death. I am not dumb!’

The royal family did not believe their ears at first when they heard her voice. But as she continued to speak to them for some minutes, they believed she was not dumb at all.

Then, all of a sudden, the two ducklings changed into her two brothers. And she was so happy to see her two brothers in the form of persons that she started to dance about in the presence of the royal family.

When she had danced to her satisfaction, the royal family asked why she pretended to be dumb. And when she told them the reason, then the king and the other members of the family were sorry for her and her two brothers.

Then, having sympathized with her for her children which had been killed, and also for her brothers who were turned into ducklings by the witch mother for seven years, the king gave them a large sum of money and a lot of valuable things as well which they took to their village. They paid all their father’s and mother’s debts. Then, after some weeks, Bukola, their disobedient sister, went back to the prince who was her husband.





The Rich Husbandman and his Odd-looking Pawn




Hundreds of years ago, there lived in a famous village, a middle-aged man. He was a very rich husbandman – a landowner and farmer – who had a lot of farms, many children, many pawned men, and estates of several kinds. His eldest son, whose name was Tolu, used to lead the pawned men to his farms every day.

One night, in the dry season of the year, as the husbandman sat on his easy chair and his friends sat with him on the mats, one odd-looking man with horrible stature walked through the dark into his house.

‘Good evening,’ the odd-looking man said, prostrating himself in front of the husbandman and his friends, and saluting them.

The husbandman raised his head up, turned his eyes to the odd-looking man and said, ‘Yes, good evening, my man. But what kind of help do you want from me?’

‘My purpose in coming to you is to pawn myself to you for five naira. And I shall work for you till when I shall be able to refund the five naira to you.’ The odd-looking man spoke sluggishly as he squatted in front of the husbandman and his friends.

‘Are you a hard-working man, though you look odd?’ The husbandman, having cleared his throat, inquired doubtfully, with the voice of business, as he looked at the strange man from head to foot.

The odd-looking man recommended himself with a proverb: ‘I promise that you will be impressed when I start to work on your farms; I say so even though salt does not boast that it sweetens the soup.’

The husbandman doubted the odd-looking man’s integrity, so he said, ‘Well, I agree to lend you the money, but who will take your six kobo?’ – by which he meant, who would stand as surety for him?

‘I have nobody here who can take my six kobo, but as I have said, you will be impressed as soon as you see my work,’ the odd-looking man said, strengthening his promise.

‘All right, you have no surety, but you have promised to impress me by working hard. Take the five naira.’ The husbandman took out five naira from his pocket and gave it to the odd-looking man.

‘I thank you very much.’ The odd-looking man stretched out his right hand and took the money from the husbandman, kneeling down with respect. ‘And now,’ he said, ‘I believe that you are an open-handed rich farmer, just as many people have told me.’

As the odd-looking man moved his feet to walk from the sitting room to the outside, the husbandman remembered to ask him his name and his place of abode. ‘But Mr Man, wait. Please, what is your name and where do you live?’

‘My name? My name is Sunkun and my nickname is the Taskmaster and I live lonely in a calm bush which is near the path leading to your farms. Though the calm bush is hidden from the eyes of human beings, when your children and your pawns are going to farm tomorrow morning please tell them to stop at the junction which is near the Iroko tree, and then call my name loudly three times. And that is all the information I can give you.’ As soon as the husbandman had nodded, Sunkun walked to the outside and went alone in the dark.

As Sunkun, the Taskmaster or odd-looking man, went direct to the edge of the village, the husbandman still followed him with eyes. He saw that his new pawn, Sunkun, all of a sudden had one big arm, one long and thick foot, one large ear, and one large eye, instead of the two of each with which he came to the husbandman’s house.

Having seen these sudden changes on Sunkun the Taskmaster, the husbandman was so shocked with fear that without knowing he was doing so, he stood up and he sat down unexpectedly; then he screamed in great fear.

While he was in this frenzied state, all his astonished friends rushed over and asked him ‘What are you screaming for?’

‘Nothing serious: I have just remembered my hat which I have forgotten at the farm,’ he said, lying to his friends.

The following morning, when his sons and pawns got ready to go to farm, he told them that when they reached the junction which was near the Iroko tree, they should call out loudly three times the name, ‘Sunkun the Taskmaster!’

With this instruction, his sons and pawns left the village. And when they got to the junction, they called loudly three times, ‘Sunkun the Taskmaster! Sunkun the Taskmaster! Sunkun the Taskmaster!’

Sunkun answered loudly immediately with a song, singing:

Sunkun-o, Sunkun-o, Sunkun-o

Alujan-obele

Who is calling?

Sunkun-o, Alujan-obele.





They answered:

The children of the rich man

Are calling you

Alujan-obele

The children of the rich man

It is ground we are going to till

Alujan-obele.





Sunkun replied:

Go and till your own

Alujan-obele

And when it is night

I shall till my own

Alujan-obele

Sunkun-o, Alujan-obele



It is forbidden for children to see me

Alujan-obele

Sunkun-o, Alujan-obele

And adults never visit me

Alujan-obele

Sunkun-o, Alujan-obele



Sunkun, whose one eye is brass

Alujan-obele

Sunkun-o, Alujan-obele

Whose one leg is copper

Alujan-obele

Sunkun-o, Alujan-obele

And whose one side is lead

Alujan-obele



Sunkun-o, Alujan-obele

Sunkun-o, Alujan-obele

Sunkun-o, Alujan-obele





When Sunkun the Taskmaster had told the children and pawns of the husbandman that he would go to the farm in the night and till his portion of the ground, they went to the farm and tilled as much as they could of the ground which they were preparing for new crops. Then they returned to the village in the evening.

When they were going to the farm again the following day, they stopped at the same junction. They called Sunkun loudly, and he answered loudly with song as before. They told him that the day’s work was to clear the forest. After that they went direct to the farm.

When they got to the farm, they were overwhelmed with surprise when they saw that the farm which belonged to the husbandman, and those which did not belong to him, had been tilled altogether by Sunkun before day-break.

‘Was it Sunkun alone who cleared all these farms at night? No! This is not one person’s work!’ the eldest son, Tolu, uttered in surprise.

‘Surely, Sunkun is not an ordinary person at all!’ one of the pawns shouted.

‘I believe Sunkun is one of the immortal spirits of the jungle,’ another of the pawns remarked, and he was right.

When the men came to the farm again, they saw again that Sunkun had cleared the forest up to ten kilometres square. They were so afraid that they could not wait and work on the farm that morning. They all ran back to the village. They told the husbandman that Sunkun had cleared all the forests before day-break. To see if the information which his children and pawns gave to him was true or not, without hesitation, the husbandman ran to his farm.

‘What?’ the husbandman was shocked with surprise when he saw that Sunkun had cleared the whole forest of that area. ‘It is quite a long time that I have been pawning, but Sunkun is the first of his kind!’ he remarked loudly with surprise, and then he ran back to the village with throbbing heart.

He hardly sat down when he called all his sons and pawns. As all of them knelt down before him, he told them, ‘When you go to the farm tomorrow morning, tell Sunkun that his work for that day is to make heaps on the cleared ground.’

And according to the instruction given to them, when they were going to the farm in the following morning, they stopped at the usual junction. They told Sunkun that his work for that day was to make heaps. Then they went straight to the farm.

When they got to the farm and saw that Sunkun had left nothing on it for them to do, they returned to the village. They told their rich husbandman that Sunkun had left nothing for them to do.

Then, from that day, the husbandman started to think about how he could see Sunkun personally when he was working. For he wondered how Sunkun alone could do the work which not even four thousand men could do even in six months’ time.

Again, when the sons and pawns went to the farm the following day, they saw that Sunkun had made heaps on the whole land which he had cleared a few nights ago. When they brought this information to the husbandman, it made his desire stronger to find how he could see Sunkun personally when he was working.

One day, a thought came to his mind to tell Sunkun that his work for the night was to come to the village to cut hair for his sons, his pawns and himself. The husbandman thought that he would be able to see Sunkun work when he came to cut his hair for him.

The husbandman did not know that just as he was thinking in mind how to see Sunkun when working, so too it was for his eldest son, Tolu. He too wanted to see how Sunkun was doing the work in one night which four thousand men could not do in six months’ time.

When the sons and pawns of the husbandman were going to the farm in the following morning, they stopped at the usual junction which was near Sunkun’s place of abode in the calm bush. They delivered the message of the husbandman to him that his work for the night was to cut hair for the sons and pawns, and for the husbandman himself.

Sunkun the Taskmaster never worked in the daytime, but only at night. Therefore, he and his followers came to the village only after Sunkun had mesmerized (or put to sleep) all the people and their domestic animals as well. He and his followers cut all the hair off the heads of all the people, including women, and off domestic animals of the village as well, within a few minutes. And then they returned to the places of their abode before daybreak.

So it was that Sunkun and his followers cut the hair for all the people and domestic animals of the village instead of only cutting the hair of his master the husbandman, his sons, and his pawns. And none of the people or their domestic animals woke when Sunkun and his followers did the hair-cutting.

When the people woke in the morning and saw that the hair on their heads had been cut, they were so worried that they began to shout angrily about in the village. But the husbandman kept quiet. He did not tell the people that it was his pawn, Sunkun, who had cut their hair. He was afraid of being mobbed by the people.

Now, when the husbandman had failed to see how Sunkun could work as he did, he stopped worrying about Sunkun’s wonderful work.

Thus, Sunkun continued to work miraculously on the farm until the yams and maize were ripe. One morning, because the husbandman was much impressed with the work which Sunkun was doing on his farm, he told his eldest son, Tolu, to tell Sunkun that when he had finished his work that night, he should take a yam and a cob of maize from the farm to eat them in his house.

Tolu delivered his father’s message at the usual junction, but Tolu and the pawns were extremely shocked when they got to the farm the following morning and found that Sunkun had taken all the yams and maize of the farm away instead of one yam and one cob of maize. He took also away all the yams and maize which were on those farms which were near the husbandman’s farm.

Having seen that Sunkun had left nothing on the farm, they could not stay and work that morning. Instead, they ran back to the village. And when they told the husbandman that Sunkun had taken all the yams and maize away, he was so annoyed that he told Tolu to go and warn him not to work on his farm as from that day.

Now, as Tolu had also determined to see how Sunkun was working like four thousand persons, he advised his father the husbandman to allow Sunkun to make heaps for other kinds of crops before they stopped his work on the farm. Unfortunately, his father agreed.

But Tolu, the other sons, the pawns and the husbandman himself were not aware that Sunkun, the Taskmaster or odd-looking man, was the leader of the immortal spirits of the forest. All his followers were joining him to work on the farms. And that was why the work which they supposed he did alone was much more than that of four thousand persons. And that was the reason that when each of his followers and himself took one yam and one cob of maize, all the yams and cobs of maize were finished on the farm.

So the rich husbandman, his sons and his pawns did not yet understand that the more many people worked, the more they ate plenty of food.

Tolu still insisted on seeing how Sunkun was doing the work of four thousand men or even more. When he and the others got to the usual junction the following morning, they stopped there, and he told Sunkun that his work for that night was to make heaps on the cleared land. After, they went to the farm and, having worked hard, they returned to the village in the evening.

As soon as Tolu and his father’s other sons and his pawns had returned from the farm, he told his father that he would go back to the farm in the night.

‘What are you going to do on the farm in the night?’ his father asked with wonder.

‘I am going there just to watch how Sunkun does the work of so many men,’ Tolu explained, briefly.

His father warned him: ‘Don’t try to watch Sunkun at work. You know, he is not an ordinary man.’

Then Tolu left his father for another part of the house, as he pretended to be an obedient son. But when it was about eight o’clock at night, Tolu, without telling anybody in the house, went back to the farm in the dark. He entered inside a big, tall ant-hill, which was at the third corner of the farm.

He hid inside the ant-hill and then waited for Sunkun to come and do his wonderful work that night. Thus Tolu disobeyed his father in order to see how Sunkun, his father’s pawn, worked.

When Tolu had waited quietly in the ant-hill for about two hours, Sunkun emerged suddenly on the cleared land. Now Tolu, having readjusted himself, peeped out from the ant-hill with the hope to satisfy his ambition that night.

As soon as Sunkun had emerged on the cleared land, he cleared his throat. Then at the top of his voice, he started to call the name of each of his followers. And each came from the bush, a big hoe and a cutlass in hand, and stood firmly in front of Sunkun. It was thus that Sunkun called his followers until all the cleared land was crowded with immortal spirits. And all were ready to work immediately.

But Sunkun did not allow them to work immediately. Instead, he told them that the spirit of the ant-hill was still behind. He hesitated for some minutes, and yet the spirit did not come out from his ant-hill home. Sunkun became so annoyed that he shouted the name with all his power. His shout was so loud that both the hills and ground shook heavily.

And as Tolu peeped out from the ant-hill, which was the home of the spirit, the ant-hill spirit answered loudly, ‘I am still in my house!’

‘Why are you still in your house when the others have come out to me?’ Sunkun the Taskmaster shouted angrily.

The ant-hill spirit replied bitterly, ‘O pity, it is not my fault at all. Someone has blocked my doorway!’

‘But who is that someone blocking your doorway?’ Sunkun shouted angrily.

‘He is the son of the man,’ the ant-hill spirit explained with fear.

‘The son of the man in your house?’ Sunkun grumbled. ‘All right. I am coming there to see who he is!’ Then Sunkun walked with anger to the ant-hill, and he saw Tolu, who was blocking the doorway.

Sunkun was so annoyed that he cursed Tolu without mercy: ‘Tolu, may you turn into the fungus of the ant-hill now, you treacherous boy and tale-bearer of the rich husbandman!’

And Tolu, all of a sudden, turned into the fungus of the ant-hill.

Then at the same time, Sunkun put the five naira for which he pawned himself to Tolu’s father on top of the ant-hill. He put a small stone on it so that the breeze might not blow it off until the husbandman came there and took it.

Thus Sunkun, the Taskmaster or odd-looking man, refunded the five naira for which he pawned himself.

And at the same time, Sunkun ordered his followers to return to their respective places of abode, and he too returned to the calm bush where he lived near the junction. And it was from that night that he stopped working on the farms of the rich husbandman who was Tolu’s father.

When Tolu’s father failed to find Tolu at home, he and his other sons and his pawns went to the farm. It was the following morning. Almost as soon as they started to search for him, they came to the ant-hill. When the husbandman saw the five naira on top of the ant-hill, he understood at once that something had happened to his son Tolu.

He took the five naira from the top of the ant-hill. Then he peeped into the ant-hill and saw the huge fungus. At once he knew that it was his son who had changed into it.

‘Yes, you have been served better by Sunkun!’ Tolu’s father, the rich husbandman, spoke loudly with tears rolling down his cheeks, ‘I warned you seriously enough yesternight not to attempt to see how Sunkun worked even more than four thousand persons could do, but you disobeyed me. I have studied Sunkun thoroughly and I have found out that he is an immortal spirit, and there is no human being who can outwit him!’

And then he and his other sons and his pawns returned to the village slowly in their sadness.





The Greedy Tortoise and the Orisa-Oko




Once there lived in a village Tortoise, the Shell-man, and his wife Yanribo, the Beetle-woman. Tortoise, the Shell-man, was selfish, cruel, cunning and greedy. His wife, the Beetle-woman, had been barren all the five years since Tortoise had married her. Because Yanribo did not bear a child as soon as Tortoise wanted her to, he went to several medicine men who gave him different kinds of medicines for his wife, the Beetle-woman. Although Yanribo used all, she was not pregnant.

Yet Tortoise, the Shell-man, did not tire of going from one medicine man to another until when, one day, one of his friends advised him to consult the priest of Orisa-Oko (the priest of the God of the Forest). The priest of Orisa-Oko lived lonely in the heart of a forest. The greedy Tortoise followed the advice of his friend at once and he went to the priest of Orisa-Oko. When he got to the house of the priest, he knocked at the door heavily.

‘Who is knocking at my door like that?’ the priest of the God of the Forest shouted angrily.

‘I am Tortoise, the Shell-man, please.’

‘Come in to me if you are Tortoise,’ replied the priest warmly.

Then Tortoise went in to him at once. ‘Good morning, priest of Orisa-Oko,’ Tortoise greeted him, and prostrated himself for fear of being beaten by the priest with his heavy club of bone for no cause, because the priest sometimes forced a person to behave like a lunatic.

‘Good morning, Tortoise, the Shell-man,’ replied the priest. ‘What do you want me to do for you?’

‘Since I married Yanribo five years ago, she has had no pregnancy. So,’ Tortoise begged earnestly, ‘I beg you to help me prepare a medicine which will make her pregnant when she eats it.’

‘To make your wife pregnant is simple,’ the priest explained to Tortoise. ‘But you will bring one three-year-old cock which, when it crows on earth, the people of heaven will hear its crow clearly.’

‘Such a three-year-old cock which, when it crows on earth, the people of heaven will hear its crow clearly, is simple for me to get,’ Tortoise, the Shell-man, replied.

‘Oh, that is nice,’ the priest said. ‘You can go and bring it now. And that means your wife is sure to get a pregnancy very soon.’

Without hesitation, Tortoise, the Shell-man, stood up, and he ran back to his village. ‘Yes, Yanribo,’ Tortoise said, ‘go right now to your mother and beg her to give you one three-year-old cock which, when it crows, the people of heaven will hear its crow clearly. I am sure your mother will give it to you because she loves you, and, again, she has plenty of fowls.’

‘What are we going to do with such an uncommon cock?’ Yanribo inquired with wonder.

‘The priest of Orisa-Oko is going to cook a juju-soup for you in which such a cock is one of the soup’s ingredients. The priest promised that you will be pregnant as soon as you eat the soup,’ Tortoise explained to his wife.

Yanribo, the Beetle-woman, had hardly heard so from her husband before running to her mother who gave her one of her old cocks. As soon as she returned with the cock, Tortoise took it from her, and he went back with it to the priest of the God of the Forest, Orisa-Oko. The priest killed the cock, and with other kinds of ingredients he cooked the juju-soup in one large cruse, or earthenware pot.

Before he gave it to Tortoise, he covered the cruse with its lid and he wrapped its mouth also with some leaves so that the sweet smell of the soup might not reach into Tortoise’s nose. After that, he gave it to him, and he warned him seriously: ‘Tortoise, this juju-soup is meant for a barren woman, for a female only, and it is forbidden for a male to eat it. You must not even sniff a bit of its smell into your nose, for you will conceive just like a woman. Your wife must eat all of it at once. And I promise, it will make your wife pregnant within three months after she has eaten it. Tortoise,’ added the priest, reminding Tortoise of his greed, ‘I have known you as a very greedy Shell-man for quite a long time. Will you keep my warning?’

‘Ah, why!’ Tortoise exclaimed, ‘why should I not keep to your warning, especially as you are the priest of the God of the Forest. I am a man who can control myself, you know,’ Tortoise boasted with a sweet voice.

‘But Tortoise, you should not forget that you are a perfect liar, who both young and old people of your village know well as a liar!’ the priest said, reminding Tortoise of his behaviour.

‘Oh, no! That was in the past. I do not tell lies these days. I am no longer a liar. You know, I had three lies before. But one day, it happened that when I was swimming in a big river, fortunately, one of my lies mistakenly fell from my body into the water; then, at once, the strong current carried it away. Though I struggled hard to get it back, I failed. Then, the following day, it happened that as I was wandering about in the forest looking for beasts to kill, I saw an antelope. But when I was chasing it along desperately, fortunately, my second lie fell from me. I stopped and searched for it, but I could not find it, and that was how it was lost. Again, yesterday, when I went to a small bush to pass excrement, I was pressed much by my excrement. So I hastily put my lie on the top of a stump of a tree, at the foot of which I passed my excrement. But before I finished passing the excrement, the stump of the tree had grown up with my third lie to such a height that when I stood up to take it back, my hand could not reach the top of the tree. So that is how I lost all my three lies,’ Tortoise said, deceiving the priest.

‘Is that so?’ The priest shook his head disapprovingly. ‘All right, you may carry the juju-soup to your village.’

‘But how much shall I pay you for the juju-soup?’ Tortoise asked.

‘Now, Tortoise, let me make it clear to you that you are the middleman between your wife and me. Mind you, Tortoise, the soup is not free of charge. But it is prepared for either one of two terms: first, for my loss, but for you and your wife’s gain. And second, for my gain and your wife’s gain, but for your loss. I am sure one of the three of us must be at loss at the end, Tortoise, mind you. Who will be at the loss at the end? I remind you, you are greedy!’ Thus the priest of Orisa-Oko explained the matter in an indirect way. ‘But take the soup and go. I wish you and your wife, the Beetle-woman, good luck!’

Then, without understanding what the priest had said, Tortoise, the Shell-man, prostrated himself and thanked him, and he put the cruse of the delicious juju-soup on his head and went out with gladness.

Now Tortoise, the Shell-man, was on his way to his village. But as he was carrying the juju-soup along the way, he was thinking how he could eat some of the delicious juju-soup. After a while, he trekked to a big tree. This tree was on the roadside, and it shed a very cool shadow on the area. Without a second thought, Tortoise’s greediness forced him to stop under the tree.

He put the soup down; he sat on one old ant-hill which was not far from the cruse of soup. Then he fastened his eyes on to it. He began to decide within himself whether or not to eat from the soup and give whatever remained to his wife to eat.

But all of a sudden, the sweet smell of the soup rushed into his nose. He enjoyed it so much that he was not even aware as he shouted with greed, ‘Ah, what a delicious soup this is! Is my wife going to eat it all alone? No! I shall not allow that! But the priest of Orisa-Oko has warned me seriously not to sniff even a bit of its smell!’ Tortoise was speaking to himself as if he was a dotard, each time looking at the soup and then at the sky as if he was arguing with someone.

‘Oh, I know,’ he squirmed. ‘But I must eat from this juju-soup and I won’t bother about whatever happens to me after all!’ he said, strengthening his greed.

The Tortoise, not complying with the warning of the priest of the God of the Forest, removed the leaves with which the priest had wrapped the mouth of the cruse. Again, he removed the lid as well, and then he started to eat the juju-soup with greediness.

Within a few minutes, Tortoise had eaten the delicious soup nearly to the bottom of the cruse, only then remembering to leave the remaining bit of it for his barren wife, Yanribo, the Beetle-woman, to eat.

‘Yes, I am satisfied now, and I shall carry the remainder to my wife,’ said Tortoise to his great relief.

Without hesitation, Tortoise carried the almost empty cruse to his wife, and she ate the remaining juju-soup at once.

In fact, as the priest had told Tortoise, his wife, the Beetle-woman, was pregnant within three months after she had eaten the soup. But to the surprise and fear of everyone in the village, Tortoise was pregnant like his wife. Though his wife was happy that she was pregnant at last, Tortoise was sad and embarrassed instead.

Meanwhile, as it was bad luck for the people of the village if a man was pregnant, all the old people of the village gathered together at midnight. They decided secretly the day on which they would sacrifice Tortoise, his wife, and their property to the Goddess of the River. Although the meeting was held secretly, almost everyone heard what the day was that Tortoise, his wife, and their property would be sacrificed to the Goddess of the River.

Of course, Tortoise’s pregnancy had scared people this time, yet one of his friends came to him secretly and said, ‘Tortoise, how many ears have you?’

‘I have two ears,’ Tortoise replied.

‘What are you doing with them?’ his friend asked.

‘I hear words and many other things with them,’ Tortoise replied.

‘OK. Listen to me now. I advise you now to find one way or the other to leave the village within a few days,’ Tortoise’s friend advised him strongly.

‘Why should I leave the village?’ Tortoise asked with fear.

‘The old people of the village have held a secret meeting, and they have decided to sacrifice you, your wife, and your property to the Goddess of the River in a few weeks’ time, because you have conceived when you are a man,’ his friend warned him.

Tortoise was sure that he had conceived, and that there was no alternative for the old people but to sacrifice him, his wife, and their property to the Goddess. So at midnight, and with his swelled-out belly, he escaped from the village and went back to the priest. He prostrated as flatly as he could and begged the priest earnestly, ‘I come to confess to you that I ate from the juju-soup which you gave me some time ago to give to my barren wife. But I have got pregnant like my wife, though you warned me seriously not to eat from the soup. Now, I come and beg you to give me the medicine of abortion. Please, I beg you in the name of your God of the Forest.’

‘Yes, Tortoise, this is the time that you will pay for the juju-soup which I cooked for your wife. I am at gain now, and your wife is at gain as well because she is already pregnant. But you, as the middle-man, are at loss now, because you did not follow my warning. Your greed forced you to eat from the juju-soup which was strictly forbidden for a man to eat. I told you this indirectly that day!’

Having thus reminded Tortoise, the Shell-man, the priest then shouted wildly at him, ‘All right, stand up and let me look at your belly well!’

‘Please, see how my pregnancy has swelled out,’ Tortoise said as he stood up and posed himself to the priest, lamenting.

‘Oh, yes. I see your belly now, and it is certain that you have conceived like your wife,’ the priest, having examined Tortoise’s belly, remarked. Then, frighteningly, he said, ‘But as you are a man, how are you going to deliver your pregnancy? This is a big problem for you.’

Tortoise, in fear, did not answer.

‘However, as you did not keep to my warning, you will suffer for three days,’ the priest explained, ‘because before your pregnancy can be made to disappear I shall beat your belly mercilessly for three days with my juju-club of bone.’ Then he insisted, ‘And for reward of my work for making your pregnancy disappear, and my reward for the juju-soup which I cooked for your wife, you will serve me for three years, free of charge. Do you agree to that, Tortoise?’

‘Please, I agree to your wish,’ Tortoise, willing or not, agreed.

Then the priest beat Tortoise’s belly for three days with his juju club of bone. And Tortoise’s pregnancy disappeared miraculously. Though he suffered a lot, he was happy at the end.

Afterwards, he went back to his village and showed himself to his people. They changed their minds about sacrificing him, his wife, and their property to the Goddess of the River when they saw that his pregnancy had disappeared.

But three months after his wife, Yanribo, the Beetle-woman, was delivered of a male child, Tortoise, the Shell-man, went back to the priest of Orisa-Oko and served him for three years without receiving any compensation.





About the Author




Amos Tutuola was born in Abeokuta, Nigeria, in 1920. The son of a cocoa farmer, he attended several schools before training as a blacksmith. He later worked as a civil servant. His first novel, The Palm-Wine Drinkard, was published in 1952 and brought him international recognition. From 1956 until retirement, he worked for the Nigerian Broadcasting Company while continuing to write. His last book, The Village Witch Doctor and Other Stories, was published in 1990. He died in Ibadan in 1997.





By the Same Author




THE PALM-WINE DRINKARD

MY LIFE IN THE BUSH OF GHOSTS

SIMBI AND THE SATYR OF THE DARK JUNGLE

THE BRAVE AFRICAN HUNTRESS

FEATHER WOMAN OF THE JUNGLE

AJAIYI AND HIS INHERITED POVERTY

THE WITCH-HERBALIST OF THE REMOTE TOWN

PAUPER, BRAWLER AND SLANDERER





Copyright




This ebook edition first published in 2014

by Faber and Faber Ltd

Bloomsbury House

74–77 Great Russell Street

London WC1B 3DA

All rights reserved

© The Estate of Amos Tutuola, 1990

Cover design by Faber

The right of Amos Tutuola to be identified as author of this work has been asserted in accordance with Section 77 of the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988

This ebook is copyright material and must not be copied, reproduced, transferred, distributed, leased, licensed or publicly performed or used in any way except as specifically permitted in writing by the publishers, as allowed under the terms and conditions under which it was purchased or as strictly permitted by applicable copyright law. Any unauthorised distribution or use of this text may be a direct infringement of the author’s and publisher’s rights, and those responsible may be liable in law accordingly

ISBN 978–0–571–31133–0





